1. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12888. doi: 10.1111/desc.12888.

Introduction to special issue on global child development studies.

Jensen SKG(1)(2), Obradović J(3), Nelson CA 3rd(2)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Boston College School of Social Work, Chestnut Hill, MA, USA.
(2)Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Graduate School of Education, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(4)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, MA, USA.

As global child development research is taking off, this special issue provides 
a collection of recent research characterizing child development across the 
globe, validating behavioral and neuroimaging tools across diverse geographical 
setting and cultures, exploring relationships between risk and protective 
factors and diverse child outcomes, and testing novel avenues of innovative 
intervention. In particular, three prominent themes that emerge from this 
special issue are (a) research linking biology and behavior in the service of 
uncovering biological systems that are susceptible to experience and may mediate 
associations between experiences and long-term developmental outcomes in global 
child development research, (b) a movement towards inclusion of more detailed 
investigation of children's socio-emotional functions in global child 
development research, and (c) longitudinal studies of developmental outcomes 
across global settings. In this introduction we outline key themes and findings 
from the 25 articles included in the special issue.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12888
PMID: 31323172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12970. doi: 10.1111/desc.12970. Epub 2020 May 21.

The teleological stance: Past, present, and future.

Juvrud J(1), Gredebäck G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Uppsala Child and Baby Lab, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.

We review the support for, and criticisms of, the teleological stance theory, 
often described as a foundation for goal-directed action understanding early in 
life. A major point of contention in the literature has been how teleological 
processes and assumptions of rationality are represented and understood in 
infancy, and this debate has been largely centered on three paradigms. Visual 
habituation studies assess infant's abilities to retrospectively assess 
teleological processes; the presence of such processes is supported by the 
literature. Rational imitation is a phenomenon that has been questioned both 
theoretically and empirically, and there is currently little support for this 
concept in the literature. The involvement of teleological processes in action 
prediction is unclear. To date, the ontology of teleological processes remains 
unspecified. To remedy this, we present a new action-based theory of 
teleological processes (here referred to as the embodied account of teleological 
processes), based on the development of goal-directed reaching with its origin 
during the fetal period and continuous development over the first few months of 
life.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12970
PMID: 32304172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Dev Sci. 2020 May;23(3):e12921. doi: 10.1111/desc.12921. Epub 2019 Nov 26.

Investigating the social environment of the A-not-B search task.

Dunn K(1), Bremner JG(1).

Author information:
(1)Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK.

Controversy exists concerning the origins of object permanence, with different 
measures suggesting different conclusions. Looking measures have been 
interpreted as evidence for early understanding (Baillargeon, 1987, 
Developmental Psychology, 23:655), while Piaget (The construction of reality in 
the child, 1954) interpreted perseverative reaching behaviour on his AB search 
task to be indicative of limited understanding. However, looking measures are 
often reported to be an unreliable index of infant expectation (Haith, 1998, 
Infant Behaviour and Development, 21:167) and reaching behaviour has been 
explained by many alternative processes (e.g. Smith et al., 1999, Psychological 
Review, 106:235; Topál et al., 2008, Science, 321:1831). We aimed to investigate 
whether social looking (Dunn & Bremner, 2017, Developmental Science, 20:e12452; 
Walden et al., 2007, Developmental Science, 10:654) can be used as a valid 
measure of infant expectation of object location during the Piagetian AB search 
task. Furthermore, we aimed to test the social accounts of perseverative 
reaching by investigating how the direction of experimenter gaze would affect 
infant search and social behaviour. Infant search and social behaviour was 
compared on B trials across three different conditions, namely experimenter gaze 
to midline, location A and location B. Search performance significantly improved 
when the experimenter looked to location B. Infant social looking indicated that 
infants expect the object to be found in the location in which they search and 
are actively seeking information about object location from the experimenter. We 
conclude that social looking is a valid index of infant expectation that has 
provided support for the importance of the social environment on the AB search 
task. This casts doubt on the potential for this task to provide information 
related to the development of object permanence in infancy.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12921
PMCID: PMC7187186
PMID: 31705560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interests to 
declare.


4. Dev Sci. 2019 Nov;22(6):e12837. doi: 10.1111/desc.12837. Epub 2019 May 8.

Children lose confidence in their potential to "be scientists," but not in their 
capacity to "do science".

Lei RF(1), Green ER(1), Leslie SJ(2), Rhodes M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, New York University, New York, NY.
(2)Department of Philosophy, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ.

Over the course of middle childhood, children's interest and beliefs about their 
own capacities for success in science often decline. This pernicious decline is 
especially evident among underrepresented groups, including girls, members of 
some racial and ethnic minorities, and children from lower socioeconomic 
backgrounds. The present research (N = 306, ages 6-11) found that while children 
lose interest and feelings of efficacy about their potential to "be scientists" 
across middle childhood, they maintain more robust interest and efficacy about 
"doing science." These patterns were confirmed in both longitudinal and 
cross-sectional analyses; effects were stable or increased across time and age. 
Mediation analyses revealed that the positive effect of action framing is 
partially accounted for by children's views that the group of people who do 
science is more inclusive than the category of scientists. These findings 
suggest that using action-focused language to encourage children in science is 
more inclusive and may lead to more science engagement across middle childhood 
than language that emphasizes scientists as an identity category. Implications 
for educational practices will be discussed.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12837
PMCID: PMC6803025
PMID: 31006163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


5. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e12988. doi: 10.1111/desc.12988. Epub 2020 Jun 5.

Systematic mapping of developmental milestones in wild chimpanzees.

Bründl AC(1)(2)(3), Tkaczynski PJ(1)(3), Nohon Kohou G(3), Boesch C(3)(4), 
Wittig RM(3)(4), Crockford C(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Behavior, Ecology and Culture, Max Planck Institute for 
Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Department of Neuropsychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and 
Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Taï Chimpanzee Project, Centre Suisse de Recherches Scientifiques, Abidjan, 
Côte d'Ivoire.
(4)Department of Primatology, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.

Postnatal development is protracted relative to lifespan in many primates, 
including modern humans (Homo sapiens), facilitating the acquisition of key 
motor, communication and social skills that can maximize fitness later in life. 
Nevertheless, it remains unclear what evolutionary drivers led to extended 
immature periods. While the developmental milestone literature is well 
established in humans, insight we can gain from one-species models is limited. 
By comparing the timing of relatable developmental milestones in a closely 
related species, the chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes), we can gain further 
understanding of the evolution of such an extended developmental phase. To date, 
few studies have specifically attempted to estimate developmental milestones in 
a manner comparable to the human literature, and existing studies lack 
sufficient sample sizes to estimate which milestones are more plastic with 
higher inter-individual variation in the timing of their emergence. Here, we 
describe the emergence of gross motor, fine motor, social interaction and 
communication traits from a longitudinal sample of 19 wild chimpanzee infants (8 
females and 11 males), Taï National Park, Côte d'Ivoire. Gross motor traits 
emerged at a mean of 4 months, communication traits at 12 months, social 
interaction traits at 14 months and fine motor traits at 15 months, with later 
emerging milestones demonstrating greater inter-individual variation in the 
timing of the emergence. This pattern of milestone emergence is broadly 
comparable to observations in humans, suggesting selection for a prolonged 
infantile phase and that sustained skills development has a deep evolutionary 
history, with implications for theories on primate brain development.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12988
PMID: 32412141


6. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12951. doi: 10.1111/desc.12951. Epub 2020 Mar 3.

Children's understanding of habitual behaviour.

Goldwater MB(1), Gershman SJ(2), Moul C(1), Ludowici C(1), Burton A(1), Killer 
B(1), Kuhnert RL(3), Ridgway K(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW, Australia.
(2)Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Black Dog Institute, Randwick, NSW, Australia.

Research into the development of Theory of Mind (ToM) has shown how children 
from a very early age infer other people's goals. However, human behaviour is 
sometimes driven not by plans to achieve goals, but by habits, which are formed 
over long periods of reinforcement. Habitual and goal-directed behaviours are 
often aligned with one another but can diverge when the optimal behavioural 
policy changes without being directly reinforced (thus specifically hobbling the 
habitual learning strategy). Unlike the flexibility of goal-directed behaviour, 
rigid habits can cause agents to persist in behaviour that is no longer 
adaptive. In the current study, all children predict agents will tend to behave 
consistently with their goals, but between the ages of 5 and 10, children showed 
an increasing understanding of how habits can cause agents to persistently take 
suboptimal actions. These findings stand out from the typical way the 
development of social reasoning is examined, which instead focuses on children's 
increasing appreciation of how others' beliefs or expectations affect how they 
will act in service of their goals. The current findings show that children also 
learn that under certain circumstances, people's actions are suboptimal despite 
potentially 'knowing better.'

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12951
PMID: 32058673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Dev Sci. 2020 May;23(3):e12924. doi: 10.1111/desc.12924. Epub 2019 Dec 4.

The social foundation of executive function.

Marciszko C(1), Forssman L(1), Kenward B(2), Lindskog M(1), Fransson M(1), 
Gredebäck G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Psychology, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, UK.

In this study, we propose that infant social cognition may 'bootstrap' the 
successive development of domain-general cognition in line with the cultural 
intelligence hypothesis. Using a longitudinal design, 6-month-old infants 
(N = 118) were assessed on two basic social cognitive tasks targeting the 
abilities to share attention with others and understanding other peoples' 
actions. At 10 months, we measured the quality of the child's social learning 
environment, indexed by parent's abilities to provide scaffolding behaviors 
during a problem-solving task. Eight months later, the children were followed up 
with a cognitive test-battery, including tasks of inhibitory control and working 
memory. Our results showed that better infant social action understanding 
interacted with better parental scaffolding skills in predicting simple 
inhibitory control in toddlerhood. This suggests that infants' who are better at 
understanding other's actions are also better equipped to make the most of 
existing social learning opportunities, which in turn may benefit future 
non-social cognitive outcomes.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12924
PMID: 31733012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Dev Sci. 2019 Nov;22(6):e12805. doi: 10.1111/desc.12805. Epub 2019 Feb 22.

Infants recognize counting as numerically relevant.

Wang JJ(1), Feigenson L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, Maryland.

Children do not understand the meanings of count words like "two" and "three" 
until the preschool years. But even before knowing the meanings of these 
individual words, might they recognize that counting is "about" the dimension of 
number? Here in five experiments, we asked whether infants already associate 
counting with quantities. We measured 14- and 18-month olds' ability to remember 
different numbers of hidden objects that either were or were not counted by an 
experimenter before hiding. As in previous research, we found that infants 
failed to differentiate four hidden objects from two when the objects were not 
counted-suggesting an upper limit on the number of individual objects they could 
represent in working memory. However, infants succeeded when the objects were 
simply counted aloud before hiding. We found that counting also helped infants 
differentiate four hidden objects from six (a 2:3 ratio), but not three hidden 
objects from four (a 3:4 ratio), suggesting that counting helped infants 
represent the arrays' approximate cardinalities. Hence counting directs infants' 
attention to numerical aspects of the world, showing that they recognize 
counting as numerically relevant years before acquiring the meanings of number 
words.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12805
PMID: 30719820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Dev Sci. 2020 Oct 8:e13042. doi: 10.1111/desc.13042. Online ahead of print.

Action prediction during real-time parent-infant interactions.

Monroy C(1), Chen CH(1), Houston D(1)(2), Yu C(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical 
Center, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(2)Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(3)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Texas at 
Austin, Austin, Texas, USA.

Social interactions provide a crucial context for early learning and cognitive 
development during infancy. Action prediction-the ability to anticipate an 
observed action-facilitates successful, coordinated interaction and is an 
important social-cognitive skill in early development. However, current 
knowledge about infant action prediction comes largely from screen-based 
laboratory tasks. We know little about what infants' action prediction skills 
look like during real-time, free-flowing interactions with a social partner. In 
the current study, we used head-mounted eyetracking to quantify 9-month-old 
infants' visual anticipations of their parents' actions during free-flowing 
parent-child play. Our findings reveal that infants do anticipate their parents' 
actions during dynamic interactions at rates significantly higher than would be 
expected by chance. In addition, the frequency with which they do so is 
associated with child-led joint attention and hand-eye coordination. These 
findings are the first to reveal infants' action prediction behaviors in a more 
naturalistic context than prior screen-based studies, and they support the idea 
that action prediction is inherently linked to motor development and plays an 
important role in infants' social-cognitive development. A video abstract of 
this article can be viewed at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9HrmcicfiqE.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13042
PMID: 33030770


10. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e13014. doi: 10.1111/desc.13014.

Erratum.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Dev Sci. 2019 Mar;22(2):e12751.

Infants employ sophisticated mechanisms to acquire their first language, 
including some that rely on taking the perspective of adults as speakers or 
listeners. When do infants first show awareness of what other people understand? 
We tested 14-month-old infants in two experiments measuring event-related 
potentials. In Experiment 1, we established that infants produce the N400 
effect, a brain signature of semantic violations, in a live object naming 
paradigm in the presence of an adult observer. In Experiment 2, we induced false 
beliefs about the labeled objects in the adult observer to test whether infants 
keep track of the other person's comprehension. The results revealed that 
infants reacted to the semantic incongruity heard by the other as if they 
encountered it themselves: they exhibited an N400-like response, even though 
labels were congruous from their perspective. This finding demonstrates that 
infants track the linguistic understanding of social partners. A video abstract 
of this article can be viewed at https://youtu.be/pQUv8yFhnbk.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13014
PMID: 33118703


11. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12978. doi: 10.1111/desc.12978. Epub 2020 May 17.

Screen-time influences children's mental imagery performance.

Suggate SP(1), Martzog P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Educational Sciences, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, 
Germany.

Mental imagery is a foundational human faculty that depends on active image 
construction and sensorimotor experiences. However, children now spend a 
significant proportion of their day engaged with screen-media, which (a) provide 
them with ready-made mental images, and (b) constitute a sensory narrowing 
whereby input is typically focused on the visual and auditory modalities. 
Accordingly, we test the idea that screen-time influences the development of 
children's mental imagery with a focus on mental image generation and inspection 
from the visual and haptic domains. In a longitudinal cross-lagged panel design, 
children (n = 266) aged between 3 and 9 years were tested at two points in time, 
10 months apart. Measures of screen-time and mental imagery were employed, 
alongside a host of control variables including working memory, vocabulary, 
demographics, device ownership, and age of exposure to screen-media. Findings 
indicate a statistically significant path from screen-time at time 1 to mental 
imagery at time 2, above and beyond the influence of the control variables. 
These unique findings are discussed in terms of the influence of screen-time on 
mental imagery.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12978
PMID: 32353916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e13004. doi: 10.1111/desc.13004. Epub 2020 Jun 25.

Developmental dynamics between reading and math in elementary school.

Erbeli F(1), Shi Q(1), Campbell AR(1), Hart SA(2), Woltering S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Educational Psychology, Texas A&M University, College Station, 
TX, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology and Florida Center for Reading Research, Florida 
State University, Tallahassee, FL, USA.

Reading and math attainment develop during elementary grades. Questions remain, 
though, about the co-developmental nature of the relation between reading and 
math. This study examined dynamic, longitudinal pathways between reading and 
math in first through fourth grades. Participants of the study were 554 
academically at-risk children (Mage at the first assessment point = 6.57 years; 
SD = 0.38) from Texas Project Achieve. Children were assessed utilizing the 
Woodcock-Johnson-III reading and math measures. Results from dynamic bivariate 
latent change score models indicated unidirectional longitudinal coupling 
effects from reading to math. Specifically, average and high levels of reading 
performance were associated with subsequent gains in math growth, in particular 
for below average performing children in math. In contrast, low levels of 
reading performance had negligible or no amplifying influences on change in math 
growth. The nature of the dynamics was replicated even when controlling for 
nonverbal cognitive abilities. Results demonstrated that good reading skills 
pave the way for children to develop their math skills. Such findings underscore 
the importance of considering reading performance in treating math difficulties.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13004
PMCID: PMC7725923
PMID: 32524716

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: no conflicts 
declared.


13. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e12981. doi: 10.1111/desc.12981. Epub 2020 May 22.

The processing of rhythmic structures in music and prosody by children with 
developmental dyslexia and developmental language disorder.

Caccia M(1)(2), Lorusso ML(1).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Child Psychopathology - Neurodevelopmental Disorders of Language and 
Learning, Scientific Institute IRCCS E. Medea, Bosisio Parini, Italy.
(2)School of Advanced Studies IUSS Pavia - Center of Neurocognition, 
Epistemology and Theoretical Syntax (NETS), Pavia, Italy.

Rhythm perception seems to be crucial to language development. Many studies have 
shown that children with developmental dyslexia and developmental language 
disorder have difficulties in processing rhythmic structures. In this study, we 
investigated the relationships between prosody and musical processing in Italian 
children with typical and atypical development. The tasks aimed to reproduce 
linguistic prosodic structures through musical sequences, offering a direct 
comparison between the two domains without violating the specificities of each 
one. About 16 Typically Developing children, 16 children with a diagnosis of 
Developmental Dyslexia, and 16 with a diagnosis of developmental language 
disorder (age 10-13 years) participated in the experimental study. Three tasks 
were administered: an association task between a sentence and its humming 
version, a stress discrimination task (between couples of sounds reproducing the 
intonation of Italian trisyllabic words), and an association task between 
trisyllabic nonwords with different stress position and three-notes musical 
sequences with different musical stress. Children with developmental language 
disorder perform significantly lower than Typically Developing children on the 
humming test. By contrast, children with developmental dyslexia are 
significantly slower than TD in associating nonwords with musical sequences. 
Accuracy and speed in the experimental tests correlate with metaphonological, 
language, and word reading scores. Theoretical and clinical implications are 
discussed within a multidimensional model of neurodevelopmental disorders 
including prosodic and rhythmic skills at word and sentence level.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12981
PMID: 32356924


14. Dev Sci. 2020 Dec 2:e13068. doi: 10.1111/desc.13068. Online ahead of print.

Overheard conversations can influence children's generosity.

Qin W(1), Zhao L(1)(2), Compton BJ(3), Zheng Y(1), Mao H(1), Zheng J(1), Heyman 
GD(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, School of Education, Hangzhou Normal University, 
Hangzhou, P R China.
(2)Zhejiang Key Laboratory for Research in Assessment of Cognitive Impairments, 
Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, P R China.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego, California, 
USA.

Understanding the factors that promote the development of generosity has both 
theoretical and practical importance. This study examines one potential 
influence: overheard conversations that contain evaluative statements about the 
behavior of others that were described as widely shared opinions. In Study 1 
(N = 120), younger (mean age 4.1 years old) and older (mean age 5.9 years old) 
participants overheard two adults discuss a target child's act of generosity, 
and in a between-subjects manipulation, the conversation included either praise 
for the target child, or criticism. Participants in the older group were more 
likely to behave generously on a distribution task if the overheard conversation 
involved praise rather than criticism, but the participants in the younger group 
showed no such effect. Study 2 (N = 150) and Study 3 (N = 60) were preregistered 
follow-up studies that included older children only (a 5-year-old group). Study 
2 showed that children were again more likely to share after overhearing a 
conversation in which an individual who behaved generously was described in 
favorable terms, and the same effect was seen when the overheard conversation 
involved criticism of an individual who did not share. The procedure of Study 3 
matched that of Study 1, except the distributions were made in private, and the 
overheard conversation effect was seen once again. These findings suggest that 
by age 5, children can use information they hear about individuals who are not 
present to guide their own behavior, and that overheard evaluative comments can 
promote generosity.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13068
PMID: 33269507


15. Dev Sci. 2019 Nov;22(6):e12801. doi: 10.1111/desc.12801. Epub 2019 Mar 5.

A mental number line in human newborns.

Di Giorgio E(1), Lunghi M(1), Rugani R(2)(3), Regolin L(2), Dalla Barba B(4), 
Vallortigara G(5), Simion F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Social Psychology, University of Padova, 
Padova, Italy.
(2)Department of General Psychology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
(4)Azienda Ospedaliera, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(5)Center for Mind/Brain Sciences, University of Trento, Rovereto (Trento), 
Italy.

Comment in
    Front Hum Neurosci. 2020 Mar 24;14:99.

Humans represent numbers on a mental number line with smaller numbers on the 
left and larger numbers on the right side. A left-to-right oriented 
spatial-numerical association, (SNA), has been demonstrated in animals and 
infants. However, the possibility that SNA is learnt by early exposure to 
caregivers' directional biases is still open. We conducted two experiments: in 
Experiment 1, we tested whether SNA is present at birth and in Experiment 2, we 
studied whether it depends on the relative rather than the absolute magnitude of 
numerousness. Fifty-five-hour-old newborns, once habituated to a number (12), 
spontaneously associated a smaller number (4) with the left and a larger number 
(36) with the right side (Experiment 1). SNA in neonates is not absolute but 
relative. The same number (12) was associated with the left side rather than the 
right side whenever the previously experienced number was larger (36) rather 
than smaller (4) (Experiment 2). Control on continuous physical variables showed 
that the effect is specific of discrete magnitudes. These results constitute 
strong evidence that in our species SNA originates from pre-linguistic and 
biological precursors in the brain.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12801
PMID: 30676679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Dev Sci. 2020 Jan;23(1):e12842. doi: 10.1111/desc.12842. Epub 2019 May 31.

Children, but not great apes, respect ownership.

Kanngiesser P(1), Rossano F(2), Frickel R(3), Tomm A(3), Tomasello M(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Education and Psychology, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Cognitive Science, University of California San Diego, La 
Jolla, California.
(3)Department of Developmental and Comparative Psychology, Max Planck Institute 
for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina.

Access to and control of resources is a major source of costly conflicts. 
Animals, under some conditions, respect what others control and use (i.e. 
possession). Humans not only respect possession of resources, they also respect 
ownership. Ownership can be viewed as a cooperative arrangement, where 
individuals inhibit their tendency to take others' property on the condition 
that those others will do the same. We investigated to what degree great apes 
follow this principle, as compared to human children. We conducted two 
experiments, in which dyads of individuals could access the same food resources. 
The main test of respect for ownership was whether individuals would refrain 
from taking their partner's resources even when the partner could not 
immediately access and control them. Captive apes (N = 14 dyads) failed to 
respect their partner's claim on food resources and frequently monopolized the 
resources when given the opportunity. Human children (N = 14 dyads), tested with 
a similar apparatus and procedure, respected their partner's claim and made 
spontaneous verbal references to ownership. Such respect for the property of 
others highlights the uniquely cooperative nature of human ownership 
arrangements.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12842
PMID: 31038808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Dev Sci. 2020 Oct 22:e13053. doi: 10.1111/desc.13053. Online ahead of print.

Development of spatial biases in school-aged children.

Hoyos PM(1), Kim NY(2), Cheng D(2), Finkelston A(1), Kastner S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA.

In the adult brain, biases in the allocation of spatial attention can be 
measured using a line bisection task and are directly relatable to neural 
attention signals in the fronto-parietal attention network. Behavioral studies 
on the development of spatial biases have yielded a host of inconsistent 
results, likely due to variance in sample size, definition of experimental 
groups, and motor confounds introduced by using a paper-and-pencil version of a 
line bisection task. Here, we used a perceptual, computerized version of this 
task and examined the development of spatial biases in 459 children from grades 
1-8 and 61 college freshmen. We found that children in early elementary grades 
exerted a significant leftward bias that gradually diminished with advancing 
grade level. We further show that among children in early elementary school 
grades, the degree of leftward spatial bias predicted better performance on a 
rapid automatized naming test, a predictor of reading ability. Significant 
leftward biases in early elementary school grades may be due to reading 
experience, thereby reflecting an interaction of the attention network with the 
evolving reading network.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13053
PMID: 33091223


18. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12939. doi: 10.1111/desc.12939. Epub 2020 Feb 4.

First steps toward an understanding of procedural fairness.

Surian L(1), Margoni F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Cognitive Sciences, University of Trento, 
Rovereto, Italy.

In four experiments, we tested whether 20-month-old infants are sensitive to 
violations of procedural impartiality. Participants were shown videos in which 
help was provided in two different ways. A main character provided help to two 
other agents either impartially, by helping them at the same time, or in a 
biased way, by helping one agent almost immediately while the other after a 
longer delay. Infants looked reliably longer at the biased than at the unbiased 
help scenarios despite the fact that in both scenarios help was provided to each 
beneficiary. This suggests that human infants can attend to departures from 
impartiality and, in their second year, they already show an initial 
understanding of procedural fairness.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12939
PMID: 31971644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Dev Sci. 2020 May;23(3):e12920. doi: 10.1111/desc.12920. Epub 2019 Nov 22.

Four-year-olds incorporate speaker knowledge into pragmatic inferences.

Kampa A(1), Papafragou A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Linguistics and Cognitive Science, University of Delaware, 
Newark, DE, USA.
(2)Department of Linguistics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Human communication relies on the ability to take into account the speaker's 
mental state to infer the intended meaning of an utterance in context. For 
example, a sentence such as 'Some of the animals are safe to pet' can be 
interpreted as giving rise to the inference 'Some and not all animals are safe 
to pet' when uttered by an expert. The same inference, known as a scalar 
implicature, does not arise when the sentence is spoken by someone with partial 
knowledge. Adults have been shown to derive scalar implicatures in accordance 
with the speaker's knowledge state, but in young children this ability is 
debated. Here, we revisit this question using a simple visual world paradigm. We 
find that both 4- and 5-year-olds successfully incorporate speaker knowledge 
into the derivation of scalar inferences. However, this ability does not 
generalize immediately to non-linguistic communicative contexts. These findings 
have important implications for the development of pragmatic abilities.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12920
PMID: 31693776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Dev Sci. 2019 May;22(3):e12772. doi: 10.1111/desc.12772. Epub 2019 Jan 13.

Intergenerational transmission of attentional bias and anxiety.

Aktar E(1)(2), Van Bockstaele B(2)(3), Pérez-Edgar K(4), Wiers RW(3), Bögels 
SM(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychology, Clinical Psychology Unit, Leiden University, Leiden, 
the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Child Development and Education, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Psychology, Child Study Center, The Pennsylvania State 
University, Pennsylvania.

Earlier evidence has revealed a bi-directional causal relationship between 
anxiety and attention biases in adults and children. This study investigated the 
prospective and concurrent relations between anxiety and attentional bias in a 
sample of 89 families (mothers, fathers, and first-born children). Parents' and 
children's attentional bias was measured when children were 7.5 years old, using 
both a visual probe task and visual search task with angry versus happy facial 
expressions. Generalized and social anxiety symptoms in parents and children 
were measured when children were 4.5 and 7.5 years old. Anxiety in parents and 
children was prospectively (but not concurrently) related to their respective 
attentional biases to threat: All participants showed a larger attentional bias 
to threat in the visual search (but not in the visual probe) task if they were 
more anxious at the 4.5 (but not at the 7.5) year measurement. Moreover, 
parents' anxiety levels were prospectively predictive of the visual search 
attentional bias of their children after controlling for child anxiety. More 
anxiety in mothers at 4.5 years was related to a faster detection of angry among 
happy faces, while more anxiety in fathers predicted a faster detection of happy 
among angry faces in children at 7.5 years. We found no direct association 
between parental and child attentional biases. Our study contributes to the 
recently emerging literature on attentional biases as a potential mechanism in 
the intergenerational transmission of anxiety by showing that parents' anxiety 
rather than parents' attentional bias contributes to the intergenerational 
transmission of risk for child anxiety.

© 2018 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12772
PMCID: PMC6590262
PMID: 30428152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Dev Sci. 2020 Mar;23(2):e12887. doi: 10.1111/desc.12887. Epub 2019 Jul 30.

Infants attribute false beliefs to a toy crane.

Burnside K(1), Severdija V(1), Poulin-Dubois D(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Research in Human Development, Concordia University, Montréal, 
Canada.

The mentalistic view of early theory of mind posits that infants possess a 
robust and sophisticated understanding of false belief that is masked by the 
demands of traditional explicit tasks. Much of the evidence supporting this 
mentalistic view comes from infants' looking time at events that violate their 
expectations about the beliefs of a human agent. We conducted a replication of 
the violation-of-expectation procedure, except that the human agent was replaced 
by an inanimate agent. Infants watched a toy crane repeatedly move toward a box 
containing an object. In the absence of the crane, the object changed location. 
When the crane returned, 16-month-old infants looked longer when it turned 
toward the object's new location, consistent with the attribution of a false 
belief to the crane. These results suggest that infants spontaneously attribute 
false beliefs to inanimate agents. A video abstract of this article can be 
viewed at https://youtu.be/qqEPPhd9FDo.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12887
PMID: 31309631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Dev Sci. 2019 May;22(3):e12791. doi: 10.1111/desc.12791. Epub 2019 Feb 4.

Number gestures predict learning of number words.

Gibson DJ(1), Gunderson EA(2), Spaepen E(1), Levine SC(1), Goldin-Meadow S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(2)Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

When asked to explain their solutions to a problem, children often gesture and, 
at times, these gestures convey information that is different from the 
information conveyed in speech. Children who produce these gesture-speech 
"mismatches" on a particular task have been found to profit from instruction on 
that task. We have recently found that some children produce gesture-speech 
mismatches when identifying numbers at the cusp of their knowledge, for example, 
a child incorrectly labels a set of two objects with the word "three" and 
simultaneously holds up two fingers. These mismatches differ from previously 
studied mismatches (where the information conveyed in gesture has the potential 
to be integrated with the information conveyed in speech) in that the gestured 
response contradicts the spoken response. Here, we ask whether these 
contradictory number mismatches predict which learners will profit from 
number-word instruction. We used the Give-a-Number task to measure number 
knowledge in 47 children (Mage  = 4.1 years, SD = 0.58), and used the What's on 
this Card task to assess whether children produced gesture-speech mismatches 
above their knower level. Children who were early in their number learning 
trajectories ("one-knowers" and "two-knowers") were then randomly assigned, 
within knower level, to one of two training conditions: a Counting condition in 
which children practiced counting objects; or an Enriched Number Talk condition 
containing counting, labeling set sizes, spatial alignment of neighboring sets, 
and comparison of these sets. Controlling for counting ability, we found that 
children were more likely to learn the meaning of new number words in the 
Enriched Number Talk condition than in the Counting condition, but only if they 
had produced gesture-speech mismatches at pretest. The findings suggest that 
numerical gesture-speech mismatches are a reliable signal that a child is ready 
to profit from rich number instruction and provide evidence, for the first time, 
that cardinal number gestures have a role to play in number-learning.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12791
PMCID: PMC6470030
PMID: 30566755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12941. doi: 10.1111/desc.12941. Epub 2020 Feb 13.

Two-year-old children preferentially transmit simple actions but not 
pedagogically demonstrated actions.

Bazhydai M(1), Silverstein P(1)(2), Parise E(1), Westermann G(1).

Author information:
(1)Psychology Department, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK.
(2)School of Psychology, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK.

Children are sensitive to both social and non-social aspects of the learning 
environment. Among social cues, pedagogical communication has been shown to not 
only play a role in children's learning, but also in their own active 
transmission of knowledge. Vredenburgh, Kushnir and Casasola, Developmental 
Science, 2015, 18, 645 showed that 2-year-olds are more likely to demonstrate an 
action to a naive adult after learning it in a pedagogical than in a 
non-pedagogical context. This finding was interpreted as evidence that 
pedagogically transmitted information has a special status as culturally 
relevant. Here we test the limits of this claim by setting it in contrast with 
an explanation in which the relevance of information is the outcome of multiple 
interacting social (e.g., pedagogical demonstration) and non-social properties 
(e.g., action complexity). To test these competing hypotheses, we varied both 
pedagogical cues and action complexity in an information transmission paradigm 
with 2-year-old children. In Experiment 1, children preferentially transmitted 
simple non-pedagogically demonstrated actions over pedagogically demonstrated 
more complex actions. In Experiment 2, when both actions were matched for 
complexity, we found no evidence of preferential transmission of pedagogically 
demonstrated actions. We discuss possible reasons for the discrepancy between 
our results and previous literature showing an effect of pedagogical cues on 
cultural transmission, and conclude that our results are compatible with the 
view that pedagogical and other cues interact, but incompatible with the theory 
of a privileged role for pedagogical cues.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12941
PMID: 31981382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Dev Sci. 2020 May;23(3):e12906. doi: 10.1111/desc.12906. Epub 2019 Oct 20.

Atypicalities in sleep and semantic consolidation in autism.

Fletcher FE(1), Knowland V(1), Walker S(1), Gaskell MG(1), Norbury C(2), 
Henderson LM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of York, York, UK.
(2)Division of Psychology and language Sciences, UCL, London, UK.

Sleep is known to support the neocortical consolidation of declarative memory, 
including the acquisition of new language. Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is 
often characterized by both sleep and language learning difficulties, but few 
studies have explored a potential connection between the two. Here, 54 children 
with and without ASD (matched on age, nonverbal ability and vocabulary) were 
taught nine rare animal names (e.g., pipa). Memory was assessed via definitions, 
naming and speeded semantic decision tasks immediately after learning 
(pre-sleep), the next day (post-sleep, with a night of polysomnography between 
pre- and post-sleep tests) and roughly 1 month later (follow-up). Both groups 
showed comparable performance at pre-test and similar levels of overnight change 
on all tasks; but at follow-up children with ASD showed significantly greater 
forgetting of the unique features of the new animals (e.g., pipa is a flat 
frog). Children with ASD had significantly lower central non-rapid eye movement 
(NREM) sigma power. Associations between spindle properties and overnight 
changes in speeded semantic decisions differed by group. For the TD group, 
spindle duration predicted overnight changes in responses to novel animals but 
not familiar animals, reinforcing a role for sleep in the stabilization of new 
semantic knowledge. For the ASD group, sigma power and spindle duration were 
associated with improvements in responses to novel and particularly familiar 
animals, perhaps reflecting more general sleep-associated improvements in task 
performance. Plausibly, microstructural sleep atypicalities in children with ASD 
and differences in how information is prioritized for consolidation may lead to 
cumulative consolidation difficulties, compromising the quality of newly formed 
semantic representations in long-term memory.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12906
PMCID: PMC7187235
PMID: 31569286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflict of interest exist for any authors.


25. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12859. doi: 10.1111/desc.12859. Epub 2019 May 31.

Intergenerational transmission of literacy skills among Filipino families.

Dulay KM(1), Cheung SK(2), McBride C(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong.
(2)Department of Early Childhood Education, The Education University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(3)Brain and Mind Institute (BMI) and Department of Psychology, The Chinese 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

We examined the joint role of parental word reading skills and conventional home 
literacy environment measures among 320 Filipino low- to middle-income families 
in Cebu City, Philippines with children aged 5-8 years old. A ranking of 
parent-reported ratings of their frequency of engaging in home literacy 
activities and adult literacy practices revealed that book-related behaviors 
were less frequently practiced relative to other behaviors, and mean ratings on 
the home literacy resources scale suggested a relatively print-poor environment. 
Nevertheless, scale items about book reading and direct literacy instruction at 
home correlated with child's language and literacy skills. Structural equation 
modeling showed that parent's education and frequency of engaging in home 
literacy activities uniquely accounted for variance in child's oral language and 
print knowledge skills. In a second model, parent's word reading skills were 
significantly related to child's skills, but did not eliminate or attenuate 
influences from parent's education and home literacy activities. Results are 
important in relation to theories on the intergenerational transmission of 
literacy skills and the generalizability of findings from developed countries to 
developing country contexts.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12859
PMID: 31102426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Dev Sci. 2020 Jan;23(1):e12861. doi: 10.1111/desc.12861. Epub 2019 Jun 14.

Encouraging performance monitoring promotes proactive control in children.

Hadley LV(1), Acluche F(2), Chevalier N(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Nottingham, Glasgow, UK.
(2)East Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan.
(3)University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

Monitoring progression towards one's goals is essential for efficient cognitive 
control. Immature performance monitoring may contribute to suboptimal cognitive 
control engagement in childhood, potentially explaining why children engage 
control reactively even when proactive control would be more effective. This 
study investigated whether encouraging children to actively monitor their 
performance results in more mature control engagement. 
Electroencephalography data were collected while children and adults performed a 
flanker task in three conditions in which they were provided no feedback, 
standard feedback, or were asked to estimate their own feedback. Both age groups 
accurately estimated their own feedback. Critically, feedback estimation 
promoted online performance monitoring and proactive engagement of attention and 
inhibition during the flanker period in children. These findings indicate that 
proactive control engagement in childhood can be effectively supported by 
encouraging performance monitoring.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12861
PMCID: PMC6916639
PMID: 31108017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


27. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12944. doi: 10.1111/desc.12944. Epub 2020 Apr 3.

Partial knowledge in the development of number word understanding.

O'Rear CD(1), McNeil NM(1), Kirkland PK(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA.

A common measure of number word understanding is the give-N task. Traditionally, 
to receive credit for understanding a number, N, children must understand that N 
does not apply to other set sizes (e.g. a child who gives three when asked for 
'three' but also when asked for 'four' would not be credited with knowing 
'three'). However, it is possible that children who correctly provide the set 
size directly above their knower level but also provide that number for other 
number words ('N + 1 givers') may be in a partial, transitional knowledge state. 
In an integrative analysis including 191 preschoolers, subset knowers who 
correctly gave N + 1 at pretest performed better at posttest than did those who 
did not correctly give N + 1. This performance was not reflective of 'full' 
knowledge of N + 1, as N + 1 givers performed worse than traditionally coded 
knowers of that set size on separate measures of number word understanding 
within a given timepoint. Results support the idea of graded representations 
(Munakata, Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5, 309-315, 2001.) in number word 
development and suggest traditional approaches to coding the give-N task may not 
completely capture children's knowledge.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12944
PMID: 32026558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Dev Sci. 2020 Dec 12:e13074. doi: 10.1111/desc.13074. Online ahead of print.

Neural time course of pain observation in infancy.

Addabbo M(1), Bolognini N(1)(2), Turati C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology & Milan Center for Neuroscience (NeuroMi, University 
of Milan-Bicocca, Milan, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Neuropsychology, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, 
Italy.

Perception of pain in others is of great evolutionary significance for the 
development of human empathy. However, infants' sensitivity to others' painful 
experiences has not been investigated so far. Here, we explored the neural time 
course of infants' processing of others' pain by measuring event-related brain 
potentials (ERPs) while 6-month-old infants observed a painful tactile 
stimulation directed towards the eye and a neutral tactile stimulation on the 
eyebrow. We analyzed both the Negative Central (Nc) and the later Late Positive 
Potential (LPP) ERP components, indexing respectively attention allocation and 
cognitive evaluation of perceptual stimuli. Results showed that observing 
painful touch elicits a mid-latency Nc (300-500 ms) over the right 
fronto-central site, which is greater in amplitude as compared to neutral touch. 
A divergent activity was also visible in the centro-parietal early (550-750 ms) 
and late (800-1000 ms) LPP, showing increased amplitudes in response to neutral 
compared to painful touch. The cognitive evaluation of painful stimuli, 
reflected by the LPP, might thus not be fully developed at 6 months of age, as 
adults typically show a larger LPP in response to painful as compared to neutral 
stimuli. Overall, infants show early attentional attuning to others' pain. This 
early sensitivity to others' painful tactile experiences might form a 
prerequisite for the development of human empathy.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13074
PMID: 33314507


29. Dev Sci. 2019 Jul;22(4):e12797. doi: 10.1111/desc.12797. Epub 2019 Jan 30.

The impact of bilingual environments on selective attention in infancy.

Comishen KJ(1), Bialystok E(1), Adler SA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Centre for Vision Research, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Bilingualism has been observed to influence cognitive processing across the 
lifespan but whether bilingual environments have an effect on selective 
attention and attention strategies in infancy remains an unresolved question. In 
Study 1, infants exposed to monolingual or bilingual environments participated 
in an eye-tracking cueing task in which they saw centrally presented stimuli 
followed by a target appearing on either the left or right side of the screen. 
Halfway through the trials, the central stimuli reliably predicted targets' 
locations. In Study 2, the first half of the trials consisted of centrally 
presented cues that predicted targets' locations; in the second half, the 
cue-target location relation switched. All infants performed similarly in Study 
1, but in Study 2 infants raised in bilingual, but not monolingual, environments 
were able to successfully update their expectations by making more correct 
anticipatory eye movements to the target and expressing faster reactive eye 
latencies toward the target in the post-switch condition. The experience of 
attending to a complex environment in which infants simultaneously process and 
contrast two languages may account for why infants raised in bilingual 
environments have greater attentional control than those raised in monolingual 
environments.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12797
PMCID: PMC6570577
PMID: 30600863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Dev Sci. 2020 Dec 8:e13072. doi: 10.1111/desc.13072. Online ahead of print.

Children automatically abstract categorical regularities during statistical 
learning.

Jung Y(1), Walther DB(1), Finn AS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Statistical learning allows us to discover myriad structures in our environment, 
which is saturated with information at many different levels-from items to 
categories. How do children learn different levels of information-about 
regularities that pertain to items and the categories they come from-and how 
does this differ from adults? Studies on category learning and memory have 
suggested that children may be more focused on items than adults. If this is 
also the case for statistical learning, children may not extract and learn the 
multi-level regularities that adults can. We report three experiments showing 
that children and adults extract both item- and category-level regularities in 
statistical learning. In Experiments 1 and 2, we show that both children and 
adults can learn structure at the item and category levels when they are 
measured independently. In Experiment 3, we show that both children and adults 
learn about categories even when exposure does not require this: both are able 
to generalize their learning from the item to the category level. Results 
indicate that statistical learning operates across multi-level structure in 
children and adults alike, enabling generalization of learning from specific 
items to exemplars from categories of those items that observers have never 
seen. Even though children may be more focused on items during other forms of 
learning, they learn about categories from item-level input during statistical 
learning.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13072
PMID: 33295082


31. Dev Sci. 2020 Mar;23(2):e12892. doi: 10.1111/desc.12892. Epub 2019 Aug 27.

Individual differences in neonatal "imitation" fail to predict early social 
cognitive behaviour.

Redshaw J(1), Nielsen M(1)(2), Slaughter V(1), Kennedy-Costantini S(1)(3), 
Oostenbroek J(1), Crimston J(1), Suddendorf T(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(2)Faculty of Humanities, University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg, South 
Africa.
(3)School of Psychology, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.

The influential hypothesis that humans imitate from birth - and that this 
capacity is foundational to social cognition - is currently being challenged 
from several angles. Most prominently, the largest and most comprehensive 
longitudinal study of neonatal imitation to date failed to find evidence that 
neonates copied any of nine actions at any of four time points (Oostenbroek et 
al., [2016] Current Biology, 26, 1334-1338). The authors of an alternative and 
statistically liberal post-hoc analysis of these same data (Meltzoff et al., 
[2017] Developmental Science, 21, e12609), however, concluded that the infants 
actually did imitate one of the nine actions: tongue protrusion. In line with 
the original intentions of this longitudinal study, we here report on whether 
individual differences in neonatal "imitation" predict later-developing social 
cognitive behaviours. We measured a variety of social cognitive behaviours in a 
subset of the original sample of infants (N = 71) during the first 18 months: 
object-directed imitation, joint attention, synchronous imitation and mirror 
self-recognition. Results show that, even using the liberal operationalization, 
individual scores for neonatal "imitation" of tongue protrusion failed to 
predict any of the later-developing social cognitive behaviours. The average 
Spearman correlation was close to zero, mean rs  = 0.027, 95% CI [-0.020, 
0.075], with all Bonferroni adjusted p values > .999. These results run counter 
to Meltzoff et al.'s rebuttal, and to the existence of a "like me" mechanism in 
neonates that is foundational to human social cognition.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12892
PMID: 31368638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Dev Sci. 2019 Jul;22(4):e12787. doi: 10.1111/desc.12787. Epub 2019 Jan 4.

Communicative hand-waving gestures facilitate object learning in preverbal 
infants.

Hirai M(1)(2), Kanakogi Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Development of Advanced Medical Technology, Jichi Medical 
University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi, Japan.
(2)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Birkbeck, University of London, 
London, UK.
(3)Department of Psychology, Otemon Gakuin University, Ibaraki, Osaka, Japan.

The theory of natural pedagogy has proposed that infants can use ostensive 
signals, including eye contact, infant-directed speech, and contingency to learn 
from others. However, the role of bodily gestures, such as hand-waving, in 
social learning has been largely ignored. To address this gap in the literature, 
this study sought to determine whether 4-month-old infants exhibited a 
preference for horizontal or vertical (control) hand-waving gestures. We also 
examined whether horizontal hand-waving gestures followed by pointing 
facilitated the process of object learning in 9-month-old infants. Results 
showed that 4-month-old infants preferred horizontal hand-waving gestures to 
vertical hand-waving gestures, even when featural and contextual information 
were removed. Furthermore, horizontal hand-waving gestures induced identity 
encoding for cued objects, whereas vertical gestures did not. These findings 
highlight the role of communicative intent embedded in bodily movements and 
indicate that hand-waving can serve as a new type of ostensive signal.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12787
PMID: 30549386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Dev Sci. 2019 Jul;22(4):e12782. doi: 10.1111/desc.12782. Epub 2019 Jan 4.

Developmental differences in the neural correlates supporting semantics and 
syntax during sentence processing.

Schneider JM(1), Maguire MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)The University of Texas at Dallas, Dallas, Texas.

School-aged and adolescent children continue to demonstrate improvements in how 
they integrate and comprehend real-time, auditory language over this 
developmental time period, which can have important implications for academic 
and social success. To better understand developmental changes in the neural 
processes engaged during language comprehension in this age group, we use 
electroencephalography to investigate how 8-9 year old, 12-13 year olds, and 
adults process semantics and syntax in naturally paced, auditory sentences. 
Participants listened to semantically and syntactically correct and incorrect 
sentences and were asked to complete an acceptability judgment task. When 
processing a semantic error, developmental differences were observed in theta, 
but not the N400, suggesting that the N400 may be too gross a measure to 
identify more subtle aspects of semantic development that occur in the school 
years. For the syntactic task, errors resulted in a larger P600 and greater beta 
decrease than correct sentences, but the amplitude and location of the P600 and 
amplitude of beta decreases differed as a function of age, suggesting 
specialization of syntactic skills is ongoing through adolescence. The current 
findings shed new light on the development of the neural oscillations supporting 
language comprehension and suggest that the neural substrates underlying 
semantic processing reach adult-like levels at a younger age than those 
underlying syntactic processing.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12782
PMID: 30525288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Dev Sci. 2019 Nov;22(6):e12807. doi: 10.1111/desc.12807. Epub 2019 Mar 10.

Brain lateralization of phonological awareness varies by maternal education.

Younger JW(1), Lee KW(1), Demir-Lira OE(2), Booth JR(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, The University of Texas 
at Austin, Austin, Texas.
(2)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, The University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, Iowa.
(3)Department of Psychology and Human Development, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, Tennessee.

Socioeconomic status (SES) has been shown to influence language skills, with 
children of lower SES backgrounds performing worse on language assessments 
compared to their higher SES peers. While there is abundant behavioral research 
on the effects of SES, whether there are differences in the neural mechanisms 
used to support language skill is less established. In this study, we examined 
the relation between maternal education (ME), a component of SES, and neural 
mechanisms of language. We focused on Kindergarten children, at the beginning of 
formal reading education, and on a pre-reading skill, phonological awareness-the 
ability to distinguish or manipulate the sounds of language. We determined 
ME-related differences in neural activity by examining a skill-matched sample of 
typically achieving 5-year-old children as they performed a rhyme judgment task. 
We examined brain lateralization in two language processing regions, the 
inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and superior temporal gyrus (STG). In the IFG, 
lateralization was related to ME but not skill: children with low ME showed 
bilateral activation compared to children with higher ME who showed leftward 
lateralization. In the STG, there was a skill by ME interaction on 
lateralization, such that children with high ME showed a positive relation 
between rightward lateralization and skill and children with low ME showed a 
positive relation between leftward lateralization and skill. Thus, we 
demonstrated ME is related to differences in neural recruitment during language 
processing, yet this difference in recruitment is not indicative of a deficit in 
linguistic processing in Kindergarten children.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12807
PMID: 30735285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Dev Sci. 2020 Jan;23(1):e0012871. doi: 10.1111/desc.12871. Epub 2019 Jul 2.

Thinking about multiple identities boosts children's flexible thinking.

Gaither SE(1), Fan SP(2), Kinzler KD(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Faculty Affiliate at the Samuel 
DuBois Cook Center on Social Equity, Center on Health and Society, Duke 
University, Durham, North Carolina.
(2)Division of the Social Sciences, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(3)Department of Psychology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York.

Studies of children's developing social identification often focus on individual 
forms of identity. Yet, everyone has multiple potential identities. Here we 
investigated whether making children aware of their multifaceted 
identities-effectively seeing themselves from multiple angles-would promote 
their flexible thinking. In Experiment 1, 6- to 7-year-old children (N = 48) 
were assigned to either a Multiple-Identities condition where they were led to 
consider their multiple identities (e.g. friend, neighbor) or to a 
Physical-Traits condition where they considered their multiple physical 
attributes (e.g. legs, arms). Children in the Multiple-Identity condition 
subsequently expressed greater flexibility at problem-solving and categorization 
than children in the Physical-Traits condition. Experiment 2 (N = 72) replicated 
these findings with a new sample of 6- to 7-year-old children and demonstrated 
that a Multiple-Identity mindset must be self-relevant. Children who were led to 
think about another child's multiple identities did not express as much 
subsequent creative thinking as did children who thought about their own 
multiple identities. Experiment 3 (N = 76) showed that a Mmultiple-Identity 
framework may be particularly effective when the identities are presented via 
generic language suggesting that they are enduring traits (in this case, 
identities depicted as noun phrases rather than verbal phrases). These findings 
illustrate that something as simple as thinking about one's identity from 
multiple angles could serve as a tool to help reduce rigid thinking, which might 
increase open-mindedness in a society that is becoming increasingly diverse.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12871
PMID: 31145824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Dev Sci. 2020 Mar;23(2):e12900. doi: 10.1111/desc.12900. Epub 2019 Oct 15.

Enhanced gaze-following behavior in Deaf infants of Deaf parents.

Brooks R(1), Singleton JL(2), Meltzoff AN(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Learning & Brain Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington.
(2)Department of Linguistics, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas.

Gaze following plays a role in parent-infant communication and is a key 
mechanism by which infants acquire information about the world from social 
input. Gaze following in Deaf infants has been understudied. Twelve Deaf infants 
of Deaf parents (DoD) who had native exposure to American Sign Language (ASL) 
were gender-matched and age-matched (±7 days) to 60 spoken-language hearing 
control infants. Results showed that the DoD infants had significantly higher 
gaze-following scores than the hearing infants. We hypothesize that in the 
absence of auditory input, and with support from ASL-fluent Deaf parents, 
infants become attuned to visual-communicative signals from other people, which 
engenders increased gaze following. These findings underscore the need to revise 
the 'deficit model' of deafness. Deaf infants immersed in natural sign language 
from birth are better at understanding the signals and identifying the 
referential meaning of adults' gaze behavior compared to hearing infants not 
exposed to sign language. Broader implications for theories of social-cognitive 
development are discussed. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at 
https://youtu.be/QXCDK_CUmAI.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12900
PMCID: PMC7028450
PMID: 31486168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors have no 
conflict of interest.


37. Dev Sci. 2020 May;23(3):e12925. doi: 10.1111/desc.12925. Epub 2019 Dec 18.

Predicting educational achievement from genomic measures and socioeconomic 
status.

von Stumm S(1), Smith-Woolley E(2), Ayorech Z(3), McMillan A(4), Rimfeld K(4), 
Dale PS(5), Plomin R(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Education, University of York, Heslington, York, UK.
(2)Physiological Society, London, UK.
(3)Bristol Medical School, Population Health Sciences, University of Bristol, 
Bristol, UK.
(4)Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(5)Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences, University of New Mexico, 
Albuquerque, NM, USA.

The two best predictors of children's educational achievement available from 
birth are parents' socioeconomic status (SES) and, recently, children's 
inherited DNA differences that can be aggregated in genome-wide polygenic scores 
(GPS). Here, we chart for the first time the developmental interplay between 
these two predictors of educational achievement at ages 7, 11, 14 and 16 in a 
sample of almost 5,000 UK school children. We show that the prediction of 
educational achievement from both GPS and SES increases steadily throughout the 
school years. Using latent growth curve models, we find that GPS and SES not 
only predict educational achievement in the first grade but they also account 
for systematic changes in achievement across the school years. At the end of 
compulsory education at age 16, GPS and SES, respectively, predict 14% and 23% 
of the variance of educational achievement. Analyses of the extremes of GPS and 
SES highlight their influence and interplay: In children who have high GPS and 
come from high SES families, 77% go to university, whereas 21% of children with 
low GPS and from low SES backgrounds attend university. We find that the 
associations of GPS and SES with educational achievement are primarily additive, 
suggesting that their joint influence is particularly dramatic for children at 
the extreme ends of the distribution.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12925
PMCID: PMC7187229
PMID: 31758750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12654. doi: 10.1111/desc.12654. Epub 2018 Feb 26.

Neuroanatomical profiles of bilingual children.

Archila-Suerte P(1), Woods EA(1), Chiarello C(2), Hernandez AE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Houston, Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of California Riverside, Riverside, 
California, USA.

The goal of the present study was to examine differences in cortical thickness, 
cortical surface area, and subcortical volume between bilingual children who are 
highly proficient in two languages (i.e., English and Spanish) and bilingual 
children who are mainly proficient in one of the languages (i.e., Spanish). All 
children (N = 49) learned Spanish as a native language (L1) at home and English 
as a second language (L2) at school. Proficiency of both languages was assessed 
using the standardized Woodcock Language Proficiency Battery. Five-minute 
high-resolution anatomical scans were acquired with a 3-Tesla scanner. The 
degree of discrepancy between L1 and L2 proficiency was used to classify the 
children into two groups: children with balanced proficiency and children with 
unbalanced proficiency. The groups were comparable on language history, parental 
education, and other variables except English proficiency. Values of cortical 
thickness and surface area of the transverse STG, IFG-pars opercularis, and MFG, 
as well as subcortical volume of the caudate and putamen, were extracted from 
FreeSurfer. Results showed that children with balanced bilingualism had thinner 
cortices of the left STG, left IFG, left MFG and a larger bilateral putamen, 
whereas unbalanced bilinguals showed thicker cortices of the same regions and a 
smaller putamen. Additionally, unbalanced bilinguals with stronger foreign 
accents in the L2 showed reduced surface areas of the MFG and STS bilaterally. 
The results suggest that balanced/unbalanced bilingualism is reflected in 
different neuroanatomical characteristics that arise from biological and/or 
environmental factors.

Published 2018. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public 
domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12654
PMCID: PMC6124684
PMID: 29480569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12675. doi: 10.1111/desc.12675. Epub 2018 Apr 25.

Children imitate antisocial in-group members.

Wilks M(1), Kirby J(1)(2), Nielsen M(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Early Cognitive Development Centre, School of Psychology, University of 
Queensland, Australia.
(2)Center for Compassion and Altruism Research and Education, School of 
Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA.
(3)Faculty of Humanities, University of Johannesburg, South Africa.

Children demonstrate a pervasive in-group bias, preferring their in-group across 
a range of contexts that encompass measures of liking, imitation, and, in some 
cases, resource allocation. A growing number of studies have begun to explore 
whether antisocial in-group behavior reduces the robustness of this bias. 
However, these studies have focused on transgression evaluations, with only two 
studies focusing on social learning and none explicitly on imitation. This, 
therefore, limits the extent to which children's responses to interaction 
between in-group bias and antisocial behavior can be fully understood. The 
current research expands on the prevailing literature, utilizing imitation as a 
behavioral measure to explore the reactions of children aged 4-5 and 7-8 years 
in response to antisocial in-group behavior. Consistent with previous 
literature, antisocial in-group behavior reduced in-group liking ratings. 
Surprisingly, however, children's behavioral imitation preferences were guided 
solely by group membership, disregarding prosocial or antisocial behavior. These 
results indicate that children's explicitly reported social preferences and 
imitative preferences may be motivated by two independent drives.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12675
PMID: 29691975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Dev Sci. 2019 Nov;22(6):e12816. doi: 10.1111/desc.12816. Epub 2019 Apr 3.

Self-generated variability in object images predicts vocabulary growth.

Slone LK(1), Smith LB(1), Yu C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University 
Bloomington, Bloomington, Indiana.

Object names are a major component of early vocabularies and learning object 
names depends on being able to visually recognize objects in the world. However, 
the fundamental visual challenge of the moment-to-moment variations in object 
appearances that learners must resolve has received little attention in word 
learning research. Here we provide the first evidence that image-level object 
variability matters and may be the link that connects infant object manipulation 
to vocabulary development. Using head-mounted eye tracking, the present study 
objectively measured individual differences in the moment-to-moment variability 
of visual instances of the same object, from infants' first-person views. 
Infants who generated more variable visual object images through manual object 
manipulation at 15 months of age experienced greater vocabulary growth over the 
next six months. Elucidating infants' everyday visual experiences with objects 
may constitute a crucial missing link in our understanding of the developmental 
trajectory of object name learning.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12816
PMCID: PMC6697249
PMID: 30770597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement The authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.


41. Dev Sci. 2020 Jul;23(4):e12868. doi: 10.1111/desc.12868. Epub 2019 Jul 22.

Mapping differential responses to cognitive training using machine learning.

Rennie JP(1), Zhang M(1), Hawkins E(1), Bathelt J(1), Astle DE(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
UK.

We used two simple unsupervised machine learning techniques to identify 
differential trajectories of change in children who undergo intensive working 
memory (WM) training. We used self-organizing maps (SOMs)-a type of simple 
artificial neural network-to represent multivariate cognitive training data, and 
then tested whether the way tasks are represented changed as a result of 
training. The patterns of change we observed in the SOM weight matrices implied 
that the processes drawn upon to perform WM tasks changed following training. 
This was then combined with K-means clustering to identify distinct groups of 
children who respond to the training in different ways. Firstly, the K-means 
clustering was applied to an independent large sample (N = 616, Mage 
 = 9.16 years, range = 5.16-17.91 years) to identify subgroups. We then 
allocated children who had been through cognitive training (N = 179, Mage 
 = 9.00 years, range = 7.08-11.50 years) to these same four subgroups, both 
before and after their training. In doing so, we were able to map their 
improvement trajectories. Scores on a separate measure of fluid intelligence 
were predictive of a child's improvement trajectory. This paper provides an 
alternative approach to analysing cognitive training data that go beyond 
considering changes in individual tasks. This proof-of-principle demonstrates a 
potentially powerful way of distinguishing task-specific from domain-general 
changes following training and of establishing different profiles of response to 
training.

© 2019 The Authors Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12868
PMCID: PMC7314597
PMID: 31125497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The researchers declare that there is no 
conflict of interest involved in this work.


42. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12961. doi: 10.1111/desc.12961. Epub 2020 Apr 3.

Attentional abilities constrain language development: A cross-syndrome 
infant/toddler study.

D'Souza D(1)(2), D'Souza H(2)(3), Jones EJH(2), Karmiloff-Smith A(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Science and Engineering, Anglia Ruskin University, Cambridge, UK.
(2)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Birkbeck, University of London, 
London, UK.
(3)Department of Psychology & Newnham College, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, UK.

Typically developing (TD) infants adapt to the social world in part by shifting 
the focus of their processing resources to the relevant aspects of a visual 
scene. Any impairment in visual orienting may therefore constrain learning and 
development in domains such as language. However, although something is known 
about visual orienting in infants at risk of autism, very little is known about 
it in infants/toddlers with other neurodevelopmental disorders. This is partly 
because previous studies focused on older children and rarely compared the 
children to both chronological age (CA)- and mental age (MA)-matched TD 
controls. Yet, if visual orienting is important for learning and development, 
then it is imperative to investigate it early in development and ascertain 
whether it relates to higher level cognitive functions such as language. We used 
eye-tracking technology to directly compare visual orienting in infants/toddlers 
with one of three neurodevelopmental disorders-Down syndrome (DS), fragile X 
syndrome (FXS) and Williams syndrome (WS)-matched on CA or MA to TD controls 
(~15 months). We also measured language ability using the Mullen Scales of Early 
Learning (MSEL). We found that the ability to disengage attention from a visual 
stimulus in order to shift it to another visual stimulus is related to language 
ability in infants/toddlers irrespective of group affiliation. We also found 
that, contrary to the literature, infants and toddlers with DS (but not WS) are 
slow at disengaging attention. Our data suggest that orienting attention 
constrains language development and is impaired in DS.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12961
PMID: 32154971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Dev Sci. 2020 Mar;23(2):e12899. doi: 10.1111/desc.12899. Epub 2019 Sep 18.

Stroop interference is a composite phenomenon: Evidence from distinct 
developmental trajectories of its components.

Ferrand L(1), Ducrot S(2), Chausse P(1), Maïonchi-Pino N(1), O'Connor RJ(3), 
Parris BA(4), Perret P(5), Riggs KJ(3), Augustinova M(6).

Author information:
(1)Université Clermont Auvergne, CNRS, LAPSCO, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(2)Aix-Marseille Univ, CNRS, LPL, Aix-en-Provence, France.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Hull, Hull, UK.
(4)Department of Psychology, Bournemouth University, Poole, UK.
(5)Aix-Marseille Univ, PSYCLE, Aix-en-Provence, France.
(6)Normandie Université, UNIROUEN, CRFDP, Rouen, France.

Only one previous developmental study of Stroop task performance (Schiller, 
1966) has controlled for differences in processing speed that exist both within 
and between age groups. Therefore, the question of whether the early 
developmental change in the magnitude of Stroop interference actually persists 
after controlling for processing speed needs further investigation; work that is 
further motivated by the possibility that any remaining differences would be 
caused by process(es) other than processing speed. Analysis of data from two 
experiments revealed that, even after controlling for processing speed using 
z-transformed reaction times, early developmental change persists such that the 
magnitude of overall Stroop interference is larger in 3rd- and 5th graders as 
compared to 1st graders. This pattern indicates that the magnitude of overall 
Stroop interference peaks after 2 or 3 years of reading practice (Schadler & 
Thissen, 1981). Furthermore, this peak is shown to be due to distinct components 
of Stroop interference (resulting from specific conflicts) progressively falling 
into place. Experiment 2 revealed that the change in the magnitude of Stroop 
interference specifically results from joint contributions of task, semantic and 
response conflicts in 3rd- and 5th graders as compared to a sole contribution of 
task conflict in 1st graders. The specific developmental trajectories of 
different conflicts presented in the present work provide unique evidence for 
multiple loci of Stroop interference in the processing stream (respectively 
task, semantic and response conflict) as opposed to a single (i.e. response) 
locus predicted by historically - favored response competition accounts.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12899
PMID: 31483912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Dev Sci. 2019 Nov;22(6):e12829. doi: 10.1111/desc.12829. Epub 2019 Apr 29.

Infants rapidly detect human faces in complex naturalistic visual scenes.

Kelly DJ(1), Duarte S(1), Meary D(2), Bindemann M(1), Pascalis O(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Keynes College, University of Kent, Canterbury, Kent, 
UK.
(2)Universite Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France.

Infants respond preferentially to faces and face-like stimuli from birth, but 
past research has typically presented faces in isolation or amongst an 
artificial array of competing objects. In the current study infants aged 3- to 
12-months viewed a series of complex visual scenes; half of the scenes contained 
a person, the other half did not. Infants rapidly detected and oriented to faces 
in scenes even when they were not visually salient. Although a clear 
developmental improvement was observed in face detection and interest, all 
infants displayed sensitivity to the presence of a person in a scene, by 
displaying eye movements that differed quantifiably across a range of measures 
when viewing scenes that either did or did not contain a person. We argue that 
infant's face detection capabilities are ostensibly "better" with naturalistic 
stimuli and artificial array presentations used in previous studies have 
underestimated performance.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12829
PMID: 30896078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Dev Sci. 2019 Jul;22(4):e12786. doi: 10.1111/desc.12786. Epub 2019 Jan 14.

The developmental relations between spatial cognition and mathematics in primary 
school children.

Gilligan KA(1)(2)(3), Hodgkiss A(2)(3)(4), Thomas MSC(3)(5), Farran EK(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Surrey, Surrey, UK.
(2)Department of Psychology and Human Development, UCL Institute of Education, 
University College London, London, UK.
(3)Centre for Educational Neuroscience, University of London, London, UK.
(4)Department of Education, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(5)Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck University of London, London, 
UK.

Spatial thinking is an important predictor of mathematics. However, existing 
data do not determine whether all spatial sub-domains are equally important for 
mathematics outcomes nor whether mathematics-spatial associations vary through 
development. This study addresses these questions by exploring the developmental 
relations between mathematics and spatial skills in children aged 6-10 years 
(N = 155). We extend previous findings by assessing and comparing performance 
across Uttal et al.'s (2013), four spatial sub-domains. Overall spatial skills 
explained 5%-14% of the variation across three mathematics performance measures 
(standardized mathematics skills, approximate number sense and number line 
estimation skills), beyond other known predictors of mathematics including 
vocabulary and gender. Spatial scaling (extrinsic-static sub-domain) was a 
significant predictor of all mathematics outcomes, across all ages, highlighting 
its importance for mathematics in middle childhood. Other spatial sub-domains 
were differentially associated with mathematics in a task- and age-dependent 
manner. Mental rotation (intrinsic-dynamic skills) was a significant predictor 
of mathematics at 6 and 7 years only which suggests that at approximately 
8 years of age there is a transition period regarding the spatial skills that 
are important for mathematics. Taken together, the results support the 
investigation of spatial training, particularly targeting spatial scaling, as a 
means of improving both spatial and mathematical thinking.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12786
PMID: 30548725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov 10:e13061. doi: 10.1111/desc.13061. Online ahead of print.

Newborn crawling and rooting in response to maternal breast odor.

Hym C(1), Forma V(1), Anderson DI(2), Provasi J(3), Granjon L(1), Huet V(1), 
Carpe E(1), Teulier C(4)(5), Durand K(6), Schaal B(6), Barbu-Roth M(1).

Author information:
(1)Integrative Neuroscience and Cognition Center, Université de Paris - CNRS, 
Paris, France.
(2)Marian Wright Edelman Institute, San Francisco State University, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Laboratoire CHArt, Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Paris, France.
(4)Université Paris-Saclay CIAMS, Orsay, France.
(5)Université d'Orléans, CIAMS, Orléans, France.
(6)Developmental Ethology and Cognitive Psychology Group, Center for Taste, 
Smell and Feeding Science, UMR 6265 CNRS-Université de Bourgogne-Franche-Comté, 
Dijon, France.

A growing literature shows that perception and action are already tightly 
coupled in the newborn. The current study aimed to examine the nature of the 
coupling between olfactory stimuli from the mother and the newborn's crawling 
and rooting (exploratory movements of the head). To examine the coupling, the 
crawling and rooting behavior of 28 2-day-old newborns were studied while they 
were supported prone on a mobility device shaped like a mini skateboard, the 
Crawliskate®, their head positioned directly on top of a pad infused with either 
their mother's breast odor (Maternal) or the odor of water (Control). Video and 
3D kinematic analyses of the number and types of limb movements and 
quantification of displacement across the surface revealed that newborns are 
significantly more efficient crawlers when they smell the maternal odor, moving 
greater distances although performing fewer locomotor movements. In addition, 
the newborns made significantly more head rooting movements in the presence of 
the maternal odor. These findings suggest that the circuitry underlying 
quadrupedal locomotion and exploratory movements of the head is already 
adaptable to olfactory information via higher brain processing. Moreover, the 
coupling between olfaction and the two action systems, locomotion and rooting, 
is already differentiated. As crawling enables the newborn to move toward the 
mother's breast immediately after birth and facilitates mother-infant 
interaction, the results of this study highlight the potential value of using 
maternal odors to stimulate mobility in infants at risk of motor delay and/or 
deprived of this odor when born prematurely.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13061
PMID: 33174352


47. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e12999. doi: 10.1111/desc.12999. Epub 2020 Jun 10.

Developmental changes in neural letter-selectivity: A 1-year follow-up of 
beginning readers.

van de Walle de Ghelcke A(1), Rossion B(1)(2)(3), Schiltz C(4), Lochy A(4).

Author information:
(1)Psychological Sciences Research Institute and Institute of Neuroscience, 
Université Catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.
(2)CNRS-CRAN, Université de Lorraine, Nancy, France.
(3)Service de Neurologie, CHRU-Nancy, Université de Lorraine, Nancy, France.
(4)Department of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences, Institute of Cognitive 
Science and Assessment, Université du Luxembourg, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg.

The developmental course of neural tuning to visual letter strings is unclear. 
Here we tested 39 children longitudinally, at the beginning of grade 1 
(6.45 ± 0.33 years old) and 1 year after, with fast periodic visual stimulation 
in electroencephalography to assess the evolution of selective neural responses 
to letter strings and their relationship with emerging reading abilities. At 
both grades, frequency-tagged letter strings were discriminated from pseudofont 
strings (i.e. letter-selectivity) over the left occipito-temporal cortex, with 
effects observed at the individual level in 62% of children. However, visual 
words were not discriminated from pseudowords (lexical access) at either grade. 
Following 1 year of schooling, letter-selective responses showed a specific 
increase in amplitude, a more complex pattern of harmonics, and were located 
more anteriorly over the left occipito-temporal cortex. Remarkably, at both 
grades, neural responses were highly significant at the individual level and 
correlated with individual reading scores. The amplitude increase in 
letter-selective responses between grades was not found for discrimination 
responses of familiar keyboard symbols from pseudosymbols, and was not related 
to a general increase in visual stimulation responses. These findings 
demonstrate a rapid onset of left hemispheric letter selectivity, with 1 year of 
reading instruction resulting in increased emerging reading abilities and a 
clear quantitative and qualitative evolution within left hemispheric neural 
circuits for reading.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12999
PMCID: PMC7816260
PMID: 32452594

Conflict of interest statement: None.


48. Dev Sci. 2020 Jan;23(1):e12863. doi: 10.1111/desc.12863. Epub 2019 Jun 18.

Development of predictive responses in theory of mind brain regions.

Richardson H(1), Saxe R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

When we watch movies, we consider the characters' mental states in order to 
understand and predict the narrative. Recent work in functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI) uses movie-viewing paradigms to measure functional 
responses in brain regions recruited for such mental state reasoning (the theory 
of mind ["ToM"] network). Here, two groups of young children (n = 30 3-4 years 
old, n = 26 6-7 years old) viewed a short animated movie twice while undergoing 
fMRI. As children get older, ToM brain regions were recruited earlier in time 
during the second presentation of the movie. This "narrative anticipation" 
effect is specific: there was no such effect in a control network of brain 
regions that responds just as robustly to the movie (the "Pain Matrix"). These 
results complement prior studies in adults that suggest that ToM brain regions 
play a role not just in inferring, but in actively predicting, other people's 
thoughts and feelings, and provide novel evidence that as children get older, 
their ToM brain regions increasingly make such predictions.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12863
PMID: 31125472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12977. doi: 10.1111/desc.12977. Epub 2020 Jun 14.

Temporal representation impairment in developmental dyslexia for unisensory and 
multisensory stimuli.

Gori M(1), Ober KM(2), Tinelli F(3), Coubard OA(4).

Author information:
(1)U-VIP Unit for Visually Impaired People, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, 
Genoa, Italy.
(2)Faculty of Educational Studies, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznan, Poland.
(3)Department of Developmental Neuroscience, Stella Maris Scientific Institute, 
Pisa, Italy.
(4)The Neuropsychological Laboratory, CNS-Fed, Paris, France.

Dyslexia has been associated with a problem in visual-audio integration 
mechanisms. Here, we investigate for the first time the contribution of 
unisensory cues on multisensory audio and visual integration in 32 dyslexic 
children by modelling results using the Bayesian approach. Non-linguistic 
stimuli were used. Children performed a temporal task: they had to report 
whether the middle of three stimuli was closer in time to the first one or to 
the last one presented. Children with dyslexia, compared with typical children, 
exhibited poorer unimodal thresholds, requiring greater temporal distance 
between items for correct judgements, while multisensory thresholds were well 
predicted by the Bayesian model. This result suggests that the multisensory 
deficit in dyslexia is due to impaired audio and visual inputs rather than 
impaired multisensory processing per se. We also observed that poorer temporal 
skills correlated with lower reading skills in dyslexic children, suggesting 
that this temporal capability can be linked to reading abilities.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12977
PMCID: PMC7507191
PMID: 32333455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12828. doi: 10.1111/desc.12828. Epub 2019 Apr 29.

Literacy acquisition in multilingual educational contexts: Evidence from Coastal 
Kenya.

Jasińska KK(1), Wolf S(2), Jukes MCH(3), Dubeck MM(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Health Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware.
(2)Graduate School of Education, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania.
(3)RTI International, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina.

Literacy is a powerful tool against poverty, leading to further education and 
vocational success. In sub-Saharan Africa, schoolchildren commonly learn in two 
languages-African and European. Multiple early literacy skills (including 
phonological awareness and receptive language) support literacy acquisition, but 
this has yet to be empirically tested in sub-Saharan Africa, where learning 
contexts are highly multilingual, and children are often learning to read in a 
language they do not speak at home. We use longitudinal data from 1,100 
schoolchildren spanning three groups of native languages [Mijikenda languages 
(Digo, Duruma, Chonyi, and Giriama), Kiswahili, Kikamba] in coastal Kenya 
(language of instruction: Kiswahili and English). We find that baseline 
phonological awareness and receptive language are differentially important in 
predicting literacy skills in English and in Kiswahili, and these relations are 
moderated by the degree of shared cross-linguistic features between home and 
school languages. Importantly, the relative importance of these factors changes 
over development. Implications for language development and literacy acquisition 
in linguistically diverse contexts are discussed.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12828
PMID: 30882971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Dev Sci. 2020 Jan;23(1):e12854. doi: 10.1111/desc.12854. Epub 2019 May 29.

Challenging socioeconomic status: A cross-cultural comparison of early executive 
function.

Howard SJ(1), Cook CJ(2), Everts L(2), Melhuish E(3), Scerif G(4), Norris S(5), 
Twine R(6), Kahn K(6)(7)(8), Draper CE(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Early Start and School of Education, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, 
NSW, Australia.
(2)Division of Exercise Science and Sports Medicine, Department of Human 
Biology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(3)Department of Education, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.
(5)MRC/Wits Developmental Pathways for Health Research Unit, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(6)MRC/Wits Rural Public Health and Health Transitions Research Unit, School of 
Public Health, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(7)Umeå Centre for Global Health Research, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(8)INDEPTH Network, Accra, Ghana.

The widely and internationally replicated socioeconomic status (SES) gradient of 
executive function (EF) implies that intervention approaches may do well to 
extrapolate conditions and practices from contexts that generate better child 
outcomes (in this case, higher SES circumstances) and translate these to 
contexts with comparatively poorer outcomes (often low-SES populations). Yet, 
can the reverse also be true? Using data from equivalent assessments of 1,092 
pre-schoolers' EFs in South Africa and Australia, we evaluated: the SES gradient 
of EF within each sample; and whether this SES gradient extended 
cross-culturally. The oft-found EF-SES gradients were replicated in both 
samples. However, contrary to the inferences of EF-SES associations found 
nationally, the most highly disadvantaged South African subsample outperformed 
middle- and high-SES Australian pre-schoolers on two of three EFs. This suggests 
the possibility of EF-protective and -promotive practices within low- and 
middle-income countries that may aid understandings of the nature and promotion 
of EFs.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12854
PMID: 31077525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Dev Sci. 2020 Oct 24:e13055. doi: 10.1111/desc.13055. Online ahead of print.

Computational modelling of attentional bias towards threat in paediatric 
anxiety.

Thompson A(1), Steinbeis N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology, UCL, London, UK.

Computational modelling can be used to precisely characterize the cognitive 
processes involved in attentional biases towards threat, yet so far has only 
been applied in the context of adult anxiety. Furthermore, studies investigating 
attentional biases in childhood anxiety have largely used tasks that conflate 
automatic and controlled attentional processes. By using a perceptual load 
paradigm, we separately investigate contributions from automatic and controlled 
processes to attentional biases towards negative stimuli and their association 
with paediatric anxiety. We also use computational modelling to investigate 
these mechanisms in children for the first time. In a sample of 60 children 
(aged 5-11 years) we used a perceptual load task specifically adapted for 
children, in order to investigate attentional biases towards fearful (compared 
with happy and neutral) faces. Outcome measures were reaction time and 
percentage accuracy. We applied a drift diffusion model to investigate the 
precise cognitive mechanisms involved. The load effect was associated with 
significant differences in response time, accuracy and the diffusion modelling 
parameters drift rate and extra-decisional time. Greater anxiety was associated 
with greater accuracy and the diffusion modelling parameter 'drift rate' on the 
fearful face trials. This was specific to the high load condition. These 
findings suggest that attentional biases towards fearful faces in childhood 
anxiety are driven by increased perceptual sensitivity towards fear in automatic 
attentional systems. Our findings from computational modelling suggest that 
current attention bias modification treatments should target perceptual encoding 
directly rather than processes occurring afterwards.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13055
PMID: 33098719


53. Dev Sci. 2020 Oct 8:e13045. doi: 10.1111/desc.13045. Online ahead of print.

Children's automatic evaluation of self-generated actions is different from 
adults.

Denervaud S(1)(2), Hess A(3), Sander D(1)(3), Pourtois G(4).

Author information:
(1)Swiss Center for Affective Sciences, Campus Biotech, University of Geneva, 
1202, Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)Connectomics Lab, Department of Radiology, Lausanne University Hospital, 
University of Lausanne (CHUV-UNIL), 1011, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences (FAPSE), University of Geneva, 
1204, Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Cap Lab, Department of Experimental Clinical and Health Psychology, Ghent 
University, 9000, Gent, Belgium.

Performance monitoring (PM) is central to learning and decision-making. It 
allows individuals to swiftly detect deviations between actions and intentions, 
such as response errors, and adapt behavior accordingly. Previous research 
showed that in adult participants, error monitoring is associated with two 
distinct and robust behavioral effects. First, a systematic slowing down of 
reaction time speed is typically observed following error commission, which is 
known as post-error slowing (PES). Second, response errors have been reported to 
be automatically evaluated as negative events in adults. However, it remains 
unclear whether (i) children process response errors as adults do (PES), (ii) 
they also evaluate them as negative events, and (iii) their responses vary 
according to the pedagogy experienced. To address these questions, we adapted a 
simple decision-making task previously validated in adults to measure PES as 
well as the affective processing of response errors. We recruited 8-12 year old 
children enrolled in traditional (N = 56) or Montessori (N = 45) schools, and 
compared them to adults (N = 46) on the exact same task. Results showed that 
children processed correct actions as positive events, and that adults processed 
errors as negative events. By contrast, PES was similarly observed in all 
groups. Moreover, the former effect was observed in traditional schoolchildren, 
but not in Montessori schoolchildren. These findings suggest that unlike PES, 
which likely reflects an age-invariant attention orienting towards response 
errors, their affective processing depends on both age and pedagogy.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13045
PMID: 33090680


54. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12958. doi: 10.1111/desc.12958. Epub 2020 Mar 20.

Speech accommodation toward older people in 7- To 12-year-old children.

Flamion A(1), Missotten P(1), Goffinet A(1), Kukor L(1), Nagy N(2), Adam S(1).

Author information:
(1)Psychology of Aging Unit, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.
(2)Work and Organizational Psychology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

From an early age, children develop stereotypes toward older adults leading to 
potential ageism. In young adults, ageism includes conversational changes, also 
known as elderspeak, characterized by louder, slower, and simplified speech. 
Although it has direct consequence on older adults, to date no studies have 
explored elderspeak in children. We invited 137 Belgian children aged 7-12 to 
take part in a guessing game through a dissimulated Skype session. The child had 
to make two female interlocutors in turn, one young (25 years old) and the other 
old (75), guess two different words each. During the session, children remained 
unaware of the real purpose of the game. Prosody, verbal fluency, and semantic 
content of their speech were measured using the Praat and VocabProfil software. 
The results, analyzed using mixed-design ANOVA, showed that children spoke 
louder to the older interlocutor and tended to judge her less competent to guess 
words than the younger participant. When the older person was second in turn, 
children engaged in lengthier and more detailed explanations. Unexpectedly, 
positive views on older people correlated with higher voice intensity, 
suggesting that the child's differential vocal attitudes may reflect benevolent 
ageism. In conclusion, significant speech accommodation can be detected in 7- to 
12-year-old children when they speak to an older compared with a younger 
interlocutor. This accommodation is characterized by louder voice and lengthier 
explanations.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12958
PMID: 32141670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12752. doi: 10.1111/desc.12752. Epub 2018 Oct 16.

Do children's number words begin noisy?

Wagner K(1), Chu J(2), Barner D(1).

Author information:
(1)University of California, San Diego, California.
(2)MIT Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Cambridge, Massachussetts.

How do children acquire exact meanings for number words like three or 
forty-seven? In recent years, a lively debate has probed the cognitive systems 
that support learning, with some arguing that an evolutionarily ancient 
"approximate number system" drives early number word meanings, and others 
arguing that learning is supported chiefly by representations of small sets of 
discrete individuals. This debate has centered around the findings generated by 
Wynn's (, ) Give-a-Number task, which she used to categorize children into 
discrete "knower level" stages. Early reports confirmed Wynn's analysis, and 
took these stages to support the "small sets" hypothesis. However, more recent 
studies have disputed this analysis, and have argued that Give-a-Number data 
reveal a strong role for approximate number representations. In the present 
study, we use previously collected Give-a-Number data to replicate the analyses 
of these past studies, and to show that differences between past studies are due 
to assumptions made in analyses, rather than to differences in data themselves. 
We also show how Give-a-Number data violate the assumptions of parametric tests 
used in past studies. Based on simple non-parametric tests and model 
simulations, we conclude that (a) before children learn exact meanings for words 
like one, two, three, and four, they first acquire noisy preliminary meanings 
for these words, (b) there is no reliable evidence of preliminary meanings for 
larger meanings, and (c) Give-a-Number cannot be used to readily identify 
signatures of the approximate number system.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12752
PMID: 30230138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Dev Sci. 2020 Mar;23(2):e12877. doi: 10.1111/desc.12877. Epub 2019 Jul 2.

Maternal odor shapes rapid face categorization in the infant brain.

Leleu A(1), Rekow D(1), Poncet F(1), Schaal B(1), Durand K(1), Rossion 
B(2)(3)(4), Baudouin JY(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Developmental Ethology and Cognitive Psychology group, Centre des Sciences du 
Goût et de l'Alimentation, Université Bourgogne Franche-Comté, CNRS, Inra, 
AgroSup Dijon, Dijon, France.
(2)Psychological Sciences Research Institute, Institute of Neuroscience, 
University of Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.
(3)Université de Lorraine, CNRS, CRAN, Nancy, France.
(4)Université de Lorraine, CHRU-Nancy, Nancy, France.
(5)Laboratoire Développement, Département Psychologie du Développement, de 
l'Éducation et des Vulnérabilités (PsyDÉV), Institut de psychologie, Université 
de Lyon (Lumière Lyon 2), Individu, Processus, Handicap, Éducation (DIPHE), Bron 
cedex, France.

To successfully interact with a rich and ambiguous visual environment, the human 
brain learns to differentiate visual stimuli and to produce the same response to 
subsets of these stimuli despite their physical difference. Although this visual 
categorization function is traditionally investigated from a unisensory 
perspective, its early development is inherently constrained by multisensory 
inputs. In particular, an early-maturing sensory system such as olfaction is 
ideally suited to support the immature visual system in infancy by providing 
stability and familiarity to a rapidly changing visual environment. Here, we 
test the hypothesis that rapid visual categorization of salient visual signals 
for the young infant brain, human faces, is shaped by another highly relevant 
human-related input from the olfactory system, the mother's body odor. We 
observe that a right-hemispheric neural signature of single-glance face 
categorization from natural images is significantly enhanced in the maternal 
versus a control odor context in individual 4-month-old infant brains. A lack of 
difference between odor conditions for the common brain response elicited by 
both face and non-face images rules out a mere enhancement of arousal or visual 
attention in the maternal odor context. These observations show that 
face-selective neural activity in infancy is mediated by the presence of a 
(maternal) body odor, providing strong support for multisensory inputs driving 
category acquisition in the developing human brain and having important 
implications for our understanding of human perceptual development.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12877
PMID: 31175678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov 24:e13066. doi: 10.1111/desc.13066. Online ahead of print.

Linking language to sensory experience: onomatopoeia in early language 
development.

Motamedi Y(1)(2), Murgiano M(1), Perniss P(3), Wonnacott E(1)(4), Marshall C(5), 
Goldin-Meadow S(6), Vigliocco G(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Psychology and Language Sciences, University College London, UK.
(2)Centre for Language Evolution, the University of Edinburgh, UK.
(3)University of Cologne, Koln, Germany.
(4)Department of Education, University of Oxford, UK.
(5)Institute of Education, University College London, UK.
(6)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, USA.

A key question in developmental research concerns how children learn 
associations between words and meanings in their early language development. 
Given a vast array of possible referents, how does the child know what a word 
refers to? We contend that onomatopoeia (e.g., knock, meow), where a word's 
sound evokes the sound properties associated with its meaning, are particularly 
useful in children's early vocabulary development, offering a link between word 
and sensory experience not present in arbitrary forms. We suggest that, because 
onomatopoeia evoke imagery of the referent, children can draw from sensory 
experience to easily link onomatopoeic words to meaning, both when the referent 
is present as well as when it is absent. We use two sources of data: 
naturalistic observations of English-speaking caregiver-child interactions from 
14 up to 54 months, to establish whether these words are present early in 
caregivers' speech to children, and experimental data to test whether 
English-speaking children can learn from onomatopoeia when it is present. Our 
results demonstrate that onomatopoeia: i) are most prevalent in early 
child-directed language and in children's early productions, ii) are learnt more 
easily by children compared with non-iconic forms and iii) are used by 
caregivers in contexts where they can support communication and facilitate word 
learning.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13066
PMID: 33231339


58. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12795. doi: 10.1111/desc.12795. Epub 2019 Feb 17.

Early executive functioning in a global context: Developmental continuity and 
family protective factors.

Obradović J(1), Finch JE(2), Portilla XA(3), Rasheed MA(4), Tirado-Strayer N(5), 
Yousafzai AK(6).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Education, Stanford University, Stanford, California.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska.
(3)Family Well-Being and Child Development area, MDRC, New York, New York.
(4)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Aga Khan University, Karachi, 
Pakistan.
(5)Center for Prevention and Early Intervention, WestEd, San Fransisco, 
California.
(6)Department of Global Health and Population, Harvard T.H. Chan School of 
Public Health, Harvard University, Boston, Massachusetts.

This study extends the methodological and theoretical understanding of executive 
functions (EFs) in preschoolers from low- and middle-income countries (LMIC). 
First, the authors describe a rigorous process of adapting and evaluating six EF 
tasks to produce a culturally and developmentally appropriate measure of 
emerging EFs in a large sample of at-risk children in rural Pakistan. Next, the 
authors identify critical developmental and family factors that relate to 
preschoolers' EFs over the first 4 years of life. Direct assessment of 
children's general cognitive skills at age two showed developmental continuity 
with EFs at age four, and these early cognitive skills mediated the effect of an 
antecedent parenting intervention on EFs as well as associations of targeted 
individual and family factors with EFs. Furthermore, directly assessed maternal 
cognitive capacities and observed maternal scaffolding uniquely predicted EFs in 
preschoolers. This study is also the first to demonstrate a significant overlap 
between direct assessments of IQ and EFs in young children from LMIC. Children's 
general intelligence mediated the associations of EFs with antecedent physical 
growth and cognitive skills as well as concurrent family factors (maternal 
verbal intelligence, maternal scaffolding, and home stimulation). After 
controlling for shared variance between preschoolers' general intelligence and 
EFs, three factors emerged as unique predictors of EFs: exposure to an early 
parenting intervention, physical growth status at age two, and number of older 
siblings. The findings have important implications for the design of 
interventions that aim to improve EFs in young children in LMIC. A video 
abstract of this article can be viewed at 
https://vimeo.com/316329544/5abde94cd7.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12795
PMID: 30585683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Dev Sci. 2020 May;23(3):e12923. doi: 10.1111/desc.12923. Epub 2019 Nov 27.

Play enhances visual form perception in infancy-an active training study.

Schröder E(1), Gredebäck G(1), Gunnarsson J(1), Lindskog M(1).

Author information:
(1)Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Motor experiences and active exploration during early childhood may affect 
individual differences in a wide range of perceptual and cognitive abilities. In 
the current study, we suggest that active exploration of objects facilitates the 
ability to process object forms and magnitudes, which in turn impacts the 
development of numerosity perception. We tested our hypothesis by conducting a 
preregistered active exploration intervention with 59 8-month-old infants. The 
minimal intervention consisted of actively playing with and exploring blocks 
once a day for 8 weeks. In order to control for possible training effects on 
attention, we used book reading as a control condition. Pre- and post-test 
assessments using eye-tracking showed that block play improved visual form 
perception, where infants became better at detecting a deviant shape. 
Furthermore, using three control tasks, we showed that the intervention 
specifically improved infants' ability to process visual forms and the effect 
could not be explained by a domain general improvement in attention or visual 
perception. We found that the intervention did not improve numerosity perception 
and suggest that because of the sequential nature of our hypothesis, a longer 
time frame might be needed to see improvements in this ability. Our findings 
indicate that if infants are given more opportunities for play and exploration, 
it will have positive effects on their visual form perception, which in turn 
could help their understanding of geometrical concepts.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12923
PMCID: PMC7187289
PMID: 31721368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that we have no conflicts of 
interest.


60. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12950. doi: 10.1111/desc.12950. Epub 2020 Mar 6.

Only the right noise? Effects of phonetic and visual input variability on 
14-month-olds' minimal pair word learning.

Höhle B(1), Fritzsche T(1), Meß K(1), Philipp M(1), Gafos A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Linguistics, Cognitive Sciences, University of Potsdam, 
Potsdam, Germany.

Seminal work by Werker and colleagues (Stager & Werker [1997] Nature, 388, 
381-382) has found that 14-month-old infants do not show evidence for learning 
minimal pairs in the habituation-switch paradigm. However, when multiple 
speakers produce the minimal pair in acoustically variable ways, infants' 
performance improves in comparison to a single speaker condition (Rost & 
McMurray [2009] Developmental Science, 12, 339-349). The current study further 
extends these results and assesses how different kinds of input variability 
affect 14-month-olds' minimal pair learning in the habituation-switch paradigm 
testing German learning infants. The first two experiments investigated word 
learning when the labels were spoken by a single speaker versus when the labels 
were spoken by multiple speakers. In the third experiment we studied whether 
non-acoustic variability, implemented by visual variability of the objects 
presented together with the labels, would also affect minimal pair learning. We 
found enhanced learning in the multiple speakers compared to the single speaker 
condition, confirming previous findings with English-learning infants. In 
contrast, visual variability of the presented objects did not support learning. 
These findings both confirm and better delimit the beneficial role of 
speech-specific variability in minimal pair learning. Finally, we review 
different proposals on the mechanisms via which variability confers benefits to 
learning and outline what may be likely principles that underlie this benefit. 
We highlight among these the multiplicity of acoustic cues signalling phonemic 
contrasts and the presence of relations among these cues. It is in these 
relations where we trace part of the source for the apparent paradoxical benefit 
of variability in learning.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12950
PMID: 32052548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Dev Sci. 2020 Mar;23(2):e12880. doi: 10.1111/desc.12880. Epub 2019 Jul 9.

Triadic interactions support infants' emerging understanding of intentional 
actions.

Brandone AC(1), Stout W(1), Moty K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania.
(2)Department of Psychology, New York University, New York, New York.

Infants' understanding of the intentional nature of human action develops 
gradually across the first year of life. A key question is what mechanisms drive 
changes in this foundational social-cognitive ability. The current studies 
explored the hypothesis that triadic interactions in which infants coordinate 
attention between a social partner and an object of mutual interest promote 
infants' developing understanding of others as intentional agents. Infants' 
spontaneous tendency to participate in triadic engagement was assessed in a 
semi-structured play session with a researcher. Intentional action understanding 
was assessed by evaluating infants' ability to visually predict the goal of an 
intentional reaching action. Study 1 (N = 88) revealed that 8- to 9-month-olds 
who displayed more bouts of triadic engagement showed better concurrent 
reasoning about the goal of an intentional reaching action. Study 2 (N = 114) 
confirmed these findings using a longitudinal design and demonstrated that 
infants who displayed more bouts of triadic engagement at 6-7 months were better 
at prospectively reasoning about the goal of an intentional reaching action 
3 months later. Cross-lagged path analyses revealed that intentional action 
understanding at 6-7 months did not predict later triadic engagement, suggesting 
that early triadic engagement supports later intentional action processing and 
not the other way around. Finally, evidence from both studies revealed the 
unique contribution of triadic over dyadic forms of engagement. These results 
highlight the importance of social interaction as a developmental mechanism and 
suggest that infants enrich their understanding of intentionality through 
triadic interactions with social partners.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12880
PMCID: PMC6918004
PMID: 31206980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Dev Sci. 2020 May;23(3):e12911. doi: 10.1111/desc.12911. Epub 2019 Oct 30.

Children's implicit attitude acquisition: Evaluative statements succeed, 
repeated pairings fail.

Charlesworth TES(1), Kurdi B(1), Banaji MR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.

From the earliest ages tested, children and adults show similar overall 
magnitudes of implicit attitudes toward various social groups. However, such 
consistency in attitude magnitude may obscure meaningful age-related change in 
the ways that children (vs. adults) acquire implicit attitudes. This experiment 
investigated children's implicit attitude acquisition by comparing the separate 
and joint effects of two learning interventions, previously shown to form 
implicit attitudes in adults. Children (N = 280, ages 7-11 years) were taught 
about novel social groups through either evaluative statements (ES; auditorily 
presented verbal statements such as 'Longfaces are bad, Squarefaces are good'), 
repeated evaluative pairings (REP; visual pairings of Longface/Squareface group 
members with valenced images such as a puppy or snake), or a combination of 
ES+REP. Results showed that children acquired implicit attitudes following ES 
and ES+REP, with REP providing no additional learning beyond ES alone. Moreover, 
children did not acquire implicit attitudes in four variations of REP, each 
designed to facilitate learning by systematically increasing verbal scaffolding 
to specify (a) the learning goal, (b) the valence of the unconditioned stimuli, 
and (c) the group categories of the conditioned stimuli. These findings 
underscore the early-emerging role of verbal statements in children's implicit 
attitude acquisition, as well as a possible age-related limit in children's 
acquisition of novel implicit attitudes from repeated pairings.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12911
PMID: 31604363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Dev Sci. 2020 Dec 5:e13069. doi: 10.1111/desc.13069. Online ahead of print.

The impact of errors in infant development: Falling like a baby.

Han D(1), Adolph KE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, New York University, New York, NY, USA.

What is the role of errors in infants' acquisition of basic skills such as 
walking, skills that require immense amounts of practice to become flexible and 
generative? Do infants change their behaviors based on negative feedback from 
errors, as suggested by "reinforcement learning" in artificial intelligence, or 
do errors go largely unmarked so that learning relies on positive feedback? We 
used falling as a model system to examine the impact of errors in infant 
development. We examined fall severity based on parent reports of prior falls 
and videos of 563 falls incurred by 138 13- to 19-month-old infants during free 
play in a laboratory playroom. Parent reports of notable falls were limited to 
33% of infants and medical attention was limited to 2% of infants. 
Video-recorded falls were typically low-impact events. After falling during free 
play in the laboratory, infants rarely fussed (4% of falls), caregivers rarely 
showed concern (8% of falls), and infants were back at play within seconds. 
Impact forces were mitigated by infants' effective reactive behaviors, quick 
arrest of the fall before torso or head impact, and small body size. Moreover, 
falling did not alter infants' subsequent behavior. Infants were not deterred 
from locomotion or from interacting with the objects and elevations implicated 
in their falls. We propose that a system that discounts the impact of errors in 
early stages of development encourages infants to practice basic skills such as 
walking to the point of mastery.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13069
PMID: 33278863


64. Dev Sci. 2019 May;22(3):e12788. doi: 10.1111/desc.12788. Epub 2019 Jan 23.

Bias at the intersection of race and gender: Evidence from preschool-aged 
children.

Perszyk DR(1), Lei RF(2), Bodenhausen GV(1), Richeson JA(3), Waxman SR(1).

Author information:
(1)Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.
(2)New York University, New York, NY.
(3)Yale University, New Haven, CT.

There is ample evidence of racial and gender bias in young children, but thus 
far this evidence comes almost exclusively from children's responses to a single 
social category (either race or gender). Yet we are each simultaneously members 
of many social categories (including our race and gender). Among adults, racial 
and gender biases intersect: negative racial biases are expressed more strongly 
against males than females. Here, we consider the developmental origin of bias 
at the intersection of race and gender. Relying on both implicit and explicit 
measures, we assessed 4-year-old children's responses to target images of 
children who varied systematically in both race (Black and White) and gender 
(male and female). Children revealed a strong and consistent pro-White bias. 
This racial bias was expressed more strongly for males than females: children's 
responses to Black boys were less positive than to Black girls, White boys or 
White girls. This outcome, which constitutes the earliest evidence of bias at 
the intersection of race and gender, underscores the importance of addressing 
bias in the first years of life.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12788
PMID: 30675747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12930. doi: 10.1111/desc.12930. Epub 2019 Dec 30.

Young children are more likely to cheat after overhearing that a classmate is 
smart.

Zhao L(1)(2), Chen L(1), Sun W(1), Compton BJ(1)(3), Lee K(4)(5), Heyman GD(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychological Sciences, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, PR 
China.
(2)Zhejiang Key Laboratory for Research in Assessment of Cognitive Impairments, 
Hangzhou, PR China.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 
USA.
(4)Dr Eric Jackman Institute of Child Study, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Canada.
(5)Department of Psychology, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, PR China.

Research on moral socialization has largely focused on the role of direct 
communication and has almost completely ignored a potentially rich source of 
social influence: evaluative comments that children overhear. We examined for 
the first time whether overheard comments can shape children's moral behavior. 
Three- and 5-year-old children (N = 200) participated in a guessing game in 
which they were instructed not to cheat by peeking. We randomly assigned 
children to a condition in which they overheard an experimenter tell another 
adult that a classmate who was no longer present is smart, or to a control 
condition in which the overheard conversation consisted of non-social 
information. We found that 5-year-olds, but not 3-year-olds, cheated 
significantly more often if they overheard the classmate praised for being 
smart. These findings show that the effects of ability praise can spread far 
beyond the intended recipient to influence the behavior of children who are mere 
observers, and they suggest that overheard evaluative comments can be an 
important force in shaping moral development.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12930
PMID: 31811686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Dev Sci. 2019 Jul;22(4):e12789. doi: 10.1111/desc.12789. Epub 2019 Jan 10.

Movement segmentation and visual perturbation increase developmental differences 
in motor control and learning.

Wu J(1), Chan JSY(1), Yan JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuromotor Control and Learning, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 
P.R. China.

We examined the developmental differences in motor control and learning of a 
two-segment movement. One hundred and five participants (53 female) were divided 
into three age groups (7-8 years, 9-10 years and 19-27 years). They performed a 
two-segment movement task in four conditions (full vision, fully disturbed 
vision, disturbed vision in the first movement segment and disturbed vision in 
the second movement segment). The results for movement accuracy and overall 
movement time show that children, especially younger children, are more 
susceptible to visual perturbations than adults. The adults' movement time in 
one of the movement segments could be increased by disturbing the vision of the 
other movement segment. The children's movement time for the second movement 
segment increased when their vision of the first movement segment was disturbed. 
Disturbing the vision of the first movement segment decreased the percentage of 
central control of the second movement in younger children, but not in the other 
two age groups. The children's normalized jerk was more easily increased by 
visual perturbations. The children showed greater improvement after practice in 
the conditions of partial vision disturbance. As the participants' age 
increased, practice tended to improve their feedforward motor control rather 
than their feedback motor control. These results suggest that children's central 
movement control improves with age and practice. We discuss the theoretical 
implications and practical significance of the differential effects of visual 
perturbation and movement segmentation upon motor control and learning from a 
developmental viewpoint.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12789
PMID: 30554467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12660. doi: 10.1111/desc.12660. Epub 2018 Mar 12.

Two-year-olds use adults' but not peers' points.

Kachel G(1)(2), Moore R(1)(3), Tomasello M(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Comparative Psychology, Max Planck Institute 
for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Faculty of Social and Educational Sciences, University of Applied Sciences 
Potsdam, Germany.
(3)Berlin School of Mind and Brain, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany.
(4)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University, North Carolina, 
USA.

In the current study, 24- to 27-month-old children (N = 37) used pointing 
gestures in a cooperative object choice task with either peer or adult partners. 
When indicating the location of a hidden toy, children pointed equally 
accurately for adult and peer partners but more often for adult partners. When 
choosing from one of three hiding places, children used adults' pointing to find 
a hidden toy significantly more often than they used peers'. In interaction with 
peers, children's choice behavior was at chance level. These results suggest 
that toddlers ascribe informative value to adults' but not peers' pointing 
gestures, and highlight the role of children's social expectations in their 
communicative development.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12660
PMID: 29528166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Dev Sci. 2020 May;23(3):e12922. doi: 10.1111/desc.12922. Epub 2019 Dec 6.

Chimpanzees help others with what they want; children help them with what they 
need.

Hepach R(1), Benziad L(2), Tomasello M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Research Methods in Early Child Development, Leipzig University, Leipzig, 
Sachsen, Germany.
(2)Developmental and Comparative Psychology, Max Planck Institute for 
Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.

Humans, including young children, are strongly motivated to help others, even 
paying a cost to do so. Humans' nearest primate relatives, great apes, are 
likewise motivated to help others, raising the question of whether the 
motivations of humans and apes are the same. Here we compared the underlying 
motivation to help in human children and chimpanzees. Both species understood 
the situation and helped a conspecific in a straightforward situation. However, 
when helpers knew that what the other was requesting would not actually help 
her, only children gave her what she needed instead of giving her what she 
requested. These results suggest that both chimpanzees and human children help 
others but the underlying motivation for why they help differs. In comparison to 
chimpanzees, young children help in a paternalistic manner. The evolutionary 
hypothesis is that uniquely human socio-ecologies based on interdependent 
cooperation gave rise to uniquely human prosocial motivations to help others 
paternalistically.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12922
PMID: 31710758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12601. doi: 10.1111/desc.12601. Epub 2017 Sep 12.

Do children understand fraction addition?

Braithwaite DW(1), Tian J(1), Siegler RS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)The Siegler Center for Innovative Learning (SCIL), Advanced Technology 
Center, Beijing Normal University, China.

Many children fail to master fraction arithmetic even after years of 
instruction. A recent theory of fraction arithmetic (Braithwaite, Pyke, & 
Siegler, 2017) hypothesized that this poor learning of fraction arithmetic 
procedures reflects poor conceptual understanding of them. To test this 
hypothesis, we performed three experiments examining fourth to eighth graders' 
estimates of fraction sums. We found that roughly half of estimates of sums were 
smaller than the same child's estimate of one of the two addends in the problem. 
Moreover, children's estimates of fraction sums were no more accurate than if 
they had estimated each sum as the average of the smallest and largest possible 
response. This weak performance could not be attributed to poor mastery of 
arithmetic procedures, poor knowledge of individual fraction magnitudes, or 
general inability to estimate sums. These results suggest that a major source of 
difficulty in this domain is that many children's learning of fraction 
arithmetic procedures develops unconstrained by conceptual understanding of the 
procedures. Implications for education are discussed.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12601
PMID: 28901050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12700. doi: 10.1111/desc.12700. Epub 2018 Jun 27.

Developmental changes in automatic rule-learning mechanisms across early 
childhood.

Mueller JL(1)(2), Friederici AD(2), Männel C(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cognitive Science, University of Osnabrück, Osnabrück, Germany.
(2)Department of Neuropsychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and 
Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain 
Sciences, Leipzig and Clinic for Cognitive Neurology, Medical Faculty of the 
University of Leipzig, Germany.

Infants' ability to learn complex linguistic regularities from early on has been 
revealed by electrophysiological studies indicating that 3-month-olds, but not 
adults, can automatically detect non-adjacent dependencies between syllables. 
While different ERP responses in adults and infants suggest that both linguistic 
rule learning and its link to basic auditory processing undergo developmental 
changes, systematic investigations of the developmental trajectories are scarce. 
In the present study, we assessed 2- and 4-year-olds' ERP indicators of pitch 
discrimination and linguistic rule learning in a syllable-based oddball design. 
To test for the relation between auditory discrimination and rule learning, ERP 
responses to pitch changes were used as predictor for potential linguistic 
rule-learning effects. Results revealed that 2-year-olds, but not 4-year-olds, 
showed ERP markers of rule learning. Although, 2-year-olds' rule learning was 
not dependent on differences in pitch perception, 4-year-old children 
demonstrated a dependency, such that those children who showed more pronounced 
responses to pitch changes still showed an effect of rule learning. These 
results narrow down the developmental decline of the ability for automatic 
linguistic rule learning to the age between 2 and 4 years, and, moreover, point 
towards a strong modification of this change by auditory processes. At an age 
when the ability of automatic linguistic rule learning phases out, rule learning 
can still be observed in children with enhanced auditory responses. The observed 
interrelations are plausible causes for age-of-acquisition effects and 
inter-individual differences in language learning.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12700
PMID: 29949219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e12985. doi: 10.1111/desc.12985. Epub 2020 Jun 4.

Beyond family-level adversities: Exploring the developmental timing of 
neighborhood disadvantage effects on the brain.

Gard AM(1)(2), Maxwell AM(3), Shaw DS(4)(5), Mitchell C(2), Brooks-Gunn J(6)(7), 
McLanahan SS(8)(9)(10), Forbes EE(4)(5)(11), Monk CS(1)(2)(12), Hyde 
LW(1)(2)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Survey Research Center of the Institute for Social Research, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, 
USA.
(4)Departments of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(5)Departments of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(6)Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(7)College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(8)Department of Sociology and Public Affairs, Princeton University, Princeton, 
NJ, USA.
(9)Center for Research on Child Wellbeing, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, 
USA.
(10)Office of Population Research, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA.
(11)Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(12)Center for Human Growth and Development, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
MI, USA.

A growing literature suggests that adversity is associated with later altered 
brain function, particularly within the corticolimbic system that supports 
emotion processing and salience detection (e.g., amygdala, prefrontal cortex 
[PFC]). Although neighborhood socioeconomic disadvantage has been shown to 
predict maladaptive behavioral outcomes, particularly for boys, most of the 
research linking adversity to corticolimbic function has focused on family-level 
adversities. Moreover, although animal models and studies of normative brain 
development suggest that there may be sensitive periods during which adversity 
exerts stronger effects on corticolimbic development, little prospective 
evidence exists in humans. Using two low-income samples of boys (n = 167; 
n = 77), Census-derived neighborhood disadvantage during early childhood, but 
not adolescence, was uniquely associated with greater amygdala, but not PFC, 
reactivity to ambiguous neutral faces in adolescence and young adulthood. These 
associations remained after accounting for several family-level adversities 
(e.g., low family income, harsh parenting), highlighting the independent and 
developmentally specific neural effects of the neighborhood context. 
Furthermore, in both samples, indicators measuring income and poverty status of 
neighbors were predictive of amygdala function, suggesting that neighborhood 
economic resources may be critical to brain development.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12985
PMCID: PMC7669733
PMID: 32416027

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement The authors 
report no biomedical financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.


72. Dev Sci. 2019 Nov;22(6):e12830. doi: 10.1111/desc.12830. Epub 2019 Apr 16.

The role of production abilities in the perception of consonant category in 
infants.

Vilain A(1), Dole M(1), Lœvenbruck H(2), Pascalis O(2), Schwartz JL(1).

Author information:
(1)GIPSA-Lab, Speech & Cognition Department, CNRS, Université Grenoble Alpes, 
Grenoble INP, Grenoble, France.
(2)LPNC, CNRS, Université Grenoble Alpes, Université Savoie Mont Blanc, 
Grenoble, France.

The influence of motor knowledge on speech perception is well established, but 
the functional role of the motor system is still poorly understood. The present 
study explores the hypothesis that speech production abilities may help infants 
discover phonetic categories in the speech stream, in spite of coarticulation 
effects. To this aim, we examined the influence of babbling abilities on 
consonant categorization in 6- and 9-month-old infants. Using an intersensory 
matching procedure, we investigated the infants' capacity to associate auditory 
information about a consonant in various vowel contexts with visual information 
about the same consonant, and to map auditory and visual information onto a 
common phoneme representation. Moreover, a parental questionnaire evaluated the 
infants' consonantal repertoire. In a first experiment using /b/-/d/ consonants, 
we found that infants who displayed babbling abilities and produced the /b/ 
and/or the /d/ consonants in repetitive sequences were able to correctly perform 
intersensory matching, while non-babblers were not. In a second experiment using 
the /v/-/z/ pair, which is as visually contrasted as the /b/-/d/ pair but which 
is usually not produced at the tested ages, no significant matching was 
observed, for any group of infants, babbling or not. These results demonstrate, 
for the first time, that the emergence of babbling could play a role in the 
extraction of vowel-independent representations for consonant place of 
articulation. They have important implications for speech perception theories, 
as they highlight the role of sensorimotor interactions in the development of 
phoneme representations during the first year of life.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12830
PMID: 30908771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12969. doi: 10.1111/desc.12969. Epub 2020 Apr 21.

The gaze bias effect in toddlers: Preliminary evidence for the developmental 
study of visual decision-making.

Saito T(1)(2), Sudo R(2)(3), Takano Y(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.
(2)Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Graduate School of Systems Life Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(4)Smart-Ageing Research Center, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

Several studies have investigated the interactive relationship between attention 
and decision-making, which is known as the gaze bias effect. Although the 
generalizability of the gaze bias effect has recently been observed among young 
and older adults, it remains unknown in which developmental period individuals 
start to exhibit this relationship. This question was addressed in the current 
study by recruiting 58 toddlers aged 2-4 years. Participants were asked to do a 
two-alternative forced-choice task in which they chose one of two soft toys they 
preferred while their eye movements were recorded. Results demonstrated that 
toddlers exhibited gaze bias regardless of age. We also found that the number of 
gaze shifts during the task increased according to age. These results suggest 
that the interactive relationship between attention and decision is acquired by 
the age of two. The implications of the increased number of gaze shifts for 
visual decision-making are discussed.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12969
PMCID: PMC7685159
PMID: 32248606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: T.S., R.S., and Y.T. declare no conflict of 
interest. The funding sources were not involved in the study design, collection, 
analysis, interpretation of data, or writing of the manuscript.


74. Dev Sci. 2019 Jul;22(4):e12793. doi: 10.1111/desc.12793. Epub 2019 Jan 24.

Morphological awareness predicts the growth rate of Chinese character reading.

Lin D(1), Sun H(1), McBride C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The Education University of Hong Kong, Tai Po, Hong 
Kong.
(2)The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong.

In this longitudinal study, we assessed 88 Hong Kong Chinese typically 
developing kindergarteners' Chinese character reading accuracy four times with 
6-month intervals over 1.5 years with the first testing point in the fall of the 
second year of kindergarten (K2), during which morphological awareness, 
phonological awareness, orthographic awareness, visual-spatial relationships, 
and nonverbal IQ were tested (Time 1). The latent growth curve modeling showed 
that reading development in Chinese of typically developing kindergarteners 
followed a cumulative linear trajectory, suggesting that children with higher 
initial reading ability develop reading ability at a faster rate. Additionally, 
morphological awareness at K2 positively and uniquely predicted a linear growth 
pattern of character reading between K2 and K3 over 1.5 years, a period in which 
formal teaching and learning Chinese takes place in Hong Kong. Contributing to 
the literature, these findings highlighted the unique significance of 
morphological awareness in the growth rate of reading: Typically developing 
children with better early morphological awareness tend to have a higher initial 
point of reading ability and, more importantly, a faster growth rate, resulting 
in a wider discrepancy of developmental outcomes between low- and high- 
performers. The results suggest that greater attention should be focused on the 
development of morphological awareness in early readers, given its salient role 
in Chinese reading development.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12793
PMID: 30582261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Dev Sci. 2020 Oct 26:e13056. doi: 10.1111/desc.13056. Online ahead of print.

An exploration of amygdala-prefrontal mechanisms in the intergenerational 
transmission of learned fear.

Silvers JA(1), Callaghan BL(1), VanTieghem M(2), Choy T(3), O'Sullivan K(2), 
Tottenham N(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Graduate School of Education, University of California-Riverside, Riverside, 
CA, USA.

Humans learn about their environments by observing others, including what to 
fear and what to trust. Observational fear learning may be especially important 
early in life when children turn to their parents to gather information about 
their world. Yet, the vast majority of empirical research on fear learning in 
youth has thus far focused on firsthand classical conditioning, which may fail 
to capture one of the primary means by which fears are acquired during 
development. To address this gap in the literature, the present study examined 
observational fear learning in youth (n = 33; age range: 6-17 years) as they 
watched videos of their parent and an "unfamiliar parent" (i.e., another 
participant's parent) undergo fear conditioning. Youth demonstrated stronger 
fear learning when observing their parent compared to an unfamiliar parent, as 
indicated by changes in their self-reported liking of the stimuli to which their 
parents were conditioned (CS+, a geometric shape paired with an aversive noise; 
CS-, a geometric shape never paired with an aversive noise) and amygdala 
responses. Parent trait anxiety was associated with youth learning better (i.e., 
reporting a stronger preference for the CS- relative to CS+), and exhibiting 
stronger medial prefrontal-amygdala connectivity. Neuroimaging data were 
additionally acquired from a subset of parents during firsthand conditioning, 
and parental amygdala and mPFC activation were associated with youth's neural 
recruitment. Together, these results suggest that youth preferentially learn 
fears via observation of their parents, and this learning is associated with 
emotional traits and neural recruitment in parents.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13056
PMID: 33103280


76. Dev Sci. 2020 May;23(3):e12905. doi: 10.1111/desc.12905. Epub 2019 Oct 3.

Preschoolers find ways to resist temptation after learning that willpower can be 
energizing.

Haimovitz K(1), Dweck CS(2), Walton GM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.

Children's tendency to delay gratification predicts important life outcomes, yet 
little is known about how to enhance delay of gratification other than by 
teaching task-specific strategies. The present research investigated the effect 
of exposing children to a model who experiences the exertion of willpower as 
energizing. In two experiments, 86 4- to 5-year olds were read a story that 
represented the exertion of willpower as energizing or a control story before 
taking part in a delay of gratification task. Children exposed to a storybook 
character who struggled with waiting, but eventually found it energizing, 
spontaneously generated more delay strategies, which enhanced delay. By 
promoting the search for effective strategies, this approach provides a 
promising direction for efforts to foster self-regulation early in development.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12905
PMID: 31529554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12827. doi: 10.1111/desc.12827. Epub 2019 Apr 14.

Aggression and risk-taking as adaptive implementations of fast life history 
strategy.

Lu HJ(1), Chang L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Social Sciences, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 
Hong Kong, China.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Macau, Macau, China.

Within the evolutionary life history (LH) framework, aggression and risk-taking 
are adaptive implementations of a fast LH strategy to adapt to environmental 
unsafety and unpredictability. Based on a longitudinal sample of 198 Chinese 
adolescents living in rural areas, half of whom were separated from their 
parents, this study tested LH hypotheses about aggression and risk-taking in 
relation to safety constraints in the childhood living environments. The results 
showed that proxies of environmental unpredictability, including parental 
separation, were positively associated with aggression and risk-taking and 
negatively associated with slow LH strategy, which in turn was negatively 
associated with aggression and risk-taking. Children separated from their 
parents scored lower on slow LH strategies and higher on aggression and 
risk-taking. These findings support the evolutionary assumption that human 
development responds to safety cues through behavioral implementations of LH 
strategies.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12827
PMID: 30887602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e13010. doi: 10.1111/desc.13010. Epub 2020 Jul 25.

Familiar words can serve as a semantic seed for syntactic bootstrapping.

Babineau M(1)(2), de Carvalho A(3), Trueswell J(4), Christophe A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et Psycholinguistique, DEC-ENS/EHESS/CNRS, 
Ecole Normale Supérieure - PSL University, Paris, France.
(2)Maternité Port-Royal, AP-HP, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Paris, Paris, 
France.
(3)LaPsyDÉ, Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Young children can exploit the syntactic context of a novel word to narrow down 
its probable meaning. But how do they learn which contexts are linked to which 
semantic features in the first place? We investigate if 3- to 4-year-old 
children (n = 60) can learn about a syntactic context from tracking its use with 
only a few familiar words. After watching a 5-min training video in which a 
novel function word (i.e., 'ko') replaced either personal pronouns or articles, 
children were able to infer semantic properties for novel words co-occurring 
with the newly learned function word (i.e., objects vs. actions). These findings 
implicate a mechanism by which a distributional analysis, associated with a 
small vocabulary of known words, could be sufficient to identify some properties 
associated with specific syntactic contexts.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13010
PMCID: PMC7750202
PMID: 32589813

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests The authors 
declare that they had no conflicts of interest.


79. Dev Sci. 2019 May;22(3):e12796. doi: 10.1111/desc.12796. Epub 2019 Feb 22.

Using automated controlled rearing to explore the origins of object permanence.

Prasad A(1), Wood SMW(1), Wood JN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
California.

What are the origins of object permanence? Despite widespread interest in this 
question, methodological barriers have prevented detailed analysis of how 
experience shapes the development of object permanence in newborn organisms. 
Here, we introduce an automated controlled-rearing method for studying the 
emergence of object permanence in strictly controlled virtual environments. We 
used newborn chicks as an animal model and recorded their behavior continuously 
(24/7) from the onset of vision. Across four experiments, we found that object 
permanence can develop rapidly, within the first few days of life. This ability 
developed even when chicks were reared in impoverished visual environments 
containing no object occlusion events. Object permanence failed to develop, 
however, when chicks were reared in environments containing temporally 
non-smooth objects (objects moving on discontinuous spatiotemporal paths). These 
results suggest that experience with temporally smooth objects facilitates the 
development of object permanence, confirming a key prediction of temporal 
learning models in computational neuroscience.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12796
PMID: 30589167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12940. doi: 10.1111/desc.12940. Epub 2020 Feb 18.

Numerosity discrimination in deep neural networks: Initial competence, 
developmental refinement and experience statistics.

Testolin A(1)(2), Zou WY(3), McClelland JL(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Psychology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(2)Department of Information Engineering, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(3)Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.

Both humans and non-human animals exhibit sensitivity to the approximate number 
of items in a visual array, as indexed by their performance in numerosity 
discrimination tasks, and even neonates can detect changes in numerosity. These 
findings are often interpreted as evidence for an innate 'number sense'. 
However, recent simulation work has challenged this view by showing that 
human-like sensitivity to numerosity can emerge in deep neural networks that 
build an internal model of the sensory data. This emergentist perspective posits 
a central role for experience in shaping our number sense and might explain why 
numerical acuity progressively increases over the course of development. Here we 
substantiate this hypothesis by introducing a progressive unsupervised deep 
learning algorithm, which allows us to model the development of numerical acuity 
through experience. We also investigate how the statistical distribution of 
numerical and non-numerical features in natural environments affects the 
emergence of numerosity representations in the computational model. Our 
simulations show that deep networks can exhibit numerosity sensitivity prior to 
any training, as well as a progressive developmental refinement that is 
modulated by the statistical structure of the learning environment. To validate 
our simulations, we offer a refinement to the quantitative characterization of 
the developmental patterns observed in human children. Overall, our findings 
suggest that it may not be necessary to assume that animals are endowed with a 
dedicated system for processing numerosity, since domain-general learning 
mechanisms can capture key characteristics others have attributed to an 
evolutionarily specialized number system.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12940
PMID: 31977137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Dev Sci. 2019 Nov;22(6):e12825. doi: 10.1111/desc.12825. Epub 2019 Apr 12.

Demystifying infant vocal imitation: The roles of mouth looking and speaker's 
gaze.

Imafuku M(1)(2), Kanakogi Y(3), Butler D(1)(4), Myowa M(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Education, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Education, Musashino University, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Psychology, Otemon Gakuin University, Osaka, Japan.
(4)The Institute for Social Neuroscience Psychology, Heidelberg, Victoria, 
Australia.

Vocal imitation plays a fundamental role in human language acquisition from 
infancy. Little is known, however, about how infants imitate other's sounds. We 
focused on three factors: (a) whether infants receive information from upright 
faces, (b) the infant's observation of the speaker's mouth and (c) the speaker 
directing their gaze towards the infant. We recorded the eye movements of 
6-month-olds who participated in experiments watching videos of a speaker 
producing vowel sounds. We found that an infants' tendency to vocally imitate 
such videos increased as a function of (a) seeing upright rather than inverted 
faces, (b) their increased looking towards the speaker's mouth and (c) whether 
the speaker directed their gaze towards, rather than away from infants. These 
latter findings are consistent with theories of motor resonance and natural 
pedagogy respectively. New light has been shed on the cues and underlying 
mechanisms linking infant speech perception and production.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12825
PMID: 30980494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Dev Sci. 2019 Nov;22(6):e12809. doi: 10.1111/desc.12809. Epub 2019 Feb 28.

Monolingual but not bilingual infants demonstrate racial bias in social cue use.

Singh L(1), Quinn PC(2), Xiao NG(3), Lee K(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Delaware, 
Newark, Delaware.
(3)Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Bilingualism exerts early and pervasive effects on cognition, observable in 
infancy. Thus far, investigations of infant bilingual cognition have focused on 
sensitivity to visual memory, executive function, and linguistic sensitivity. 
Much less research has focused on how bilingualism impacts processing of social 
cues. The present study sought to investigate whether bilingualism modulates the 
expression of one aspect of social processing: early racial bias. Using a 
gaze-following paradigm, we investigated whether 18- to 20-month-old monolingual 
and bilingual infants favored their own race. Results demonstrated that 
monolingual infants favored their own race in following a model whose direction 
of gaze signaled an event. In contrast, bilingual infants demonstrated 
race-neutral gaze-following patterns, relying more heavily on the reliability of 
the behavior of the model over race. Findings suggest that bilingualism may have 
protective effects against the early emergence of racial bias.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12809
PMID: 30739383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12541. Epub 2017 Feb 22.

Developmental changes in the whole number bias.

Braithwaite DW(1), Siegler RS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)The Siegler Center for Innovative Learning (SCIL), Advanced Technology 
Center, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China.

Many students' knowledge of fractions is adversely affected by whole number 
bias, the tendency to focus on the separate whole number components (numerator 
and denominator) of a fraction rather than on the fraction's magnitude (ratio of 
numerator to denominator). Although whole number bias appears early in the 
fraction learning process and under speeded conditions persists into adulthood, 
even among mathematicians, little is known about its development. Performance 
with equivalent fractions indicated that between fourth and eighth grade, whole 
number bias decreased, and reliance on fraction magnitudes increased. These 
trends were present on both fraction magnitude comparison and number line 
estimation. However, analyses of individual children's performance indicated 
that a substantial minority of fourth graders did not show whole number bias and 
that a substantial minority of eighth graders did show it. Implications of the 
findings for development of understanding of fraction equivalence and for 
theories of numerical development are discussed.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12541
PMID: 28229555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12666. doi: 10.1111/desc.12666. Epub 2018 Apr 15.

Age differences in the prosocial influence effect.

Foulkes L(1)(2), Leung JT(1), Fuhrmann D(3), Knoll LJ(1), Blakemore SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)UCL Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, London, UK.
(2)Department of Education, University of York, York, UK.
(3)MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK.

Social influence occurs when an individual's thoughts or behaviours are affected 
by other people. There are significant age effects on susceptibility to social 
influence, typically a decline from childhood to adulthood. Most research has 
focused on negative aspects of social influence, such as peer influence on risky 
behaviour, particularly in adolescence. The current study investigated the 
impact of social influence on the reporting of prosocial behaviour (any act 
intended to help another person). In this study, 755 participants aged 8-59 
completed a computerized task in which they rated how likely they would be to 
engage in a prosocial behaviour. Afterwards, they were told the average rating 
(in fact fictitious) that other participants had given to the same question, and 
then were asked to rate the same behaviour again. We found that participants' 
age affected the extent to which they were influenced by other people: children 
(8-11 years), young adolescents (12-14 years) and mid-adolescents (15-18 years) 
all significantly changed their ratings, while young adults (19-25 years) and 
adults (26-59 years) did not. Across the three youngest age groups, children 
showed the most susceptibility to prosocial influence, changing their reporting 
of prosocial behaviour the most. The study provides evidence that younger 
people's increased susceptibility to social influence can have positive 
outcomes.

© 2018 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12666
PMCID: PMC6221149
PMID: 29658168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12974. doi: 10.1111/desc.12974. Epub 2020 May 5.

The intergenerational transmission of mathematics achievement in middle 
childhood: A prospective adoption design.

Borriello GA(1), Ramos AM(2), Natsuaki MN(3), Reiss D(4), Shaw DS(5), Leve 
LD(6), Neiderhiser JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 
Bloomington, IN, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
PA, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of California, Rivesrside, CA, USA.
(4)Department of the Child Study Center, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(6)Department of Education, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA.

The present study uses a parent-offspring adoption design to examine the dual 
roles of heritable and environmental influences on children's mathematics 
achievement. Linked sets (N = 195) of adopted children, adoptive parents, and 
birth parents each completed a measure of mathematics fluency (i.e., simple 
computational operations). Birth parent mathematics achievement and adoptive 
father mathematics achievement positively correlated with child achievement 
scores at age 7, whereas adoptive mother and adopted child mathematics 
achievement scores were not significantly associated with one another. 
Additionally, findings demonstrated no significant effects of gene-environment 
interactions on child mathematics achievement at age 7. These results indicate 
that both heritable and rearing environmental factors contribute to children's 
mathematics achievement and identify unique influences of the paternal rearing 
environment on mathematics achievement in middle childhood.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12974
PMCID: PMC7581538
PMID: 32324330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
declare.


86. Dev Sci. 2020 Dec 31. doi: 10.1111/desc.13081. Online ahead of print.

Individual differences in musical ability are stable over time in childhood.

Kragness HE(1)(2), Swaminathan S(1)(3), Cirelli LK(2), Schellenberg EG(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto Mississauga, Mississauga, ON, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto Scarborough, Scarborough, ON, 
Canada.
(3)Brain and Mind Institute, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada.
(4)Centro de Investigação e Intervenção Social (CIS-IUL), Instituto 
Universitário de Lisboa (ISCTE-IUL), Lisboa, Portugal.

The development of human abilities stems from a complex interplay between 
genetic predispositions and environmental factors. Numerous studies have 
compared musicians with non-musicians on measures of musical and non-musical 
ability, frequently attributing musicians' superior performance to their 
training. By ignoring preexisting differences, however, this view assumes that 
taking music lessons is akin to random assignment. In the present longitudinal 
study, the musical ability of 5- to 10-year-olds was measured at Time 1 with a 
test of music perception and cognition. Five years later, at Time 2, the 
children took the same test and a second test designed for older listeners. The 
test-retest correlation for aggregate scores was remarkably high, r ≈ 0.7, and 
remained strong when confounding variables (age, cognitive abilities, 
personality) were held constant. At both time points, music training was 
associated with musical ability, but the association at Time 2 became 
nonsignificant when musical ability at Time 1 was held constant. Time 1 musical 
ability also predicted duration of subsequent music training. These data are 
consistent with results from genetic studies, which implicate genes in all 
aspects of musical behavior and achievement, and with meta-analyses, which 
indicate that transfer effects from music training are weak. In short, early 
musical abilities significantly predicted later abilities, demonstrating that 
individual differences are stable over time. We found no evidence, however, to 
suggest that music training predicted musical ability after accounting for prior 
ability. The results underscore the importance of considering preexisting 
abilities in any type of learning.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13081
PMID: 33382177


87. Dev Sci. 2020 Oct 5:e13039. doi: 10.1111/desc.13039. Online ahead of print.

Bridging sensory and language theories of dyslexia: Toward a multifactorial 
model.

O'Brien G(1)(2), Yeatman JD(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Learning & Brain Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA, USA.
(2)Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA, USA.
(3)Graduate School of Education, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(4)Division of Developmental-Behavioral Pediatrics, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.

Competing theories of dyslexia posit that reading difficulties arise from 
impaired visual, auditory, phonological, or statistical learning mechanisms. 
Importantly, many theories posit that dyslexia reflects a cascade of impairments 
emanating from a single "core deficit". Here we report two studies evaluating 
core deficit and multifactorial models. In Study 1, we use publicly available 
data from the Healthy Brain Network to test the accuracy of phonological 
processing measures for predicting dyslexia diagnosis and find that over 30% of 
cases are misclassified (sensitivity = 66.7%; specificity = 68.2%). In Study 2, 
we collect a battery of psychophysical measures of visual motion processing and 
standardized measures of phonological processing in 106 school-aged children to 
investigate whether dyslexia is best conceptualized under a core-deficit model, 
or as a disorder with heterogenous origins. Specifically, by capitalizing on the 
drift diffusion model to analyze performance on a visual motion discrimination 
experiment, we show that deficits in visual motion processing, perceptual 
decision-making, and phonological processing manifest largely independently. 
Based on statistical models of how variance in reading skill is parceled across 
measures of visual processing, phonological processing, and decision-making, our 
results challenge the notion that a unifying deficit characterizes dyslexia. 
Instead, these findings indicate a model where reading skill is explained by 
several distinct, additive predictors, or risk factors, of reading (dis)ability.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13039
PMID: 33021019


88. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e13005. doi: 10.1111/desc.13005. Epub 2020 Jul 18.

States of curiosity and interest enhance memory differently in adolescents and 
in children.

Fandakova Y(1), Gruber MJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Lifespan Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, 
Berlin, Germany.
(2)Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre (CUBRIC), School of 
Psychology, Cardiff University, UK.

Curiosity - broadly defined as the desire to acquire new information - enhances 
learning and memory in adults. In addition, interest in the information (i.e., 
when the information is processed) can also facilitate later memory. To date, it 
is not known how states of pre-information curiosity and post-information 
interest enhance memory in childhood and adolescence. We used a trivia paradigm 
in which children and adolescents (N = 60, 10-14 years) encoded trivia questions 
and answers associated with high or low curiosity. States of high pre-answer 
curiosity enhanced later memory for trivia answers in both children and 
adolescents. However, higher positive post-answer interest enhanced memory for 
trivia answers beyond the effects of curiosity more strongly in adolescents than 
in children. These results suggest that curiosity and interest have positive 
effects on learning and memory in childhood and adolescence, but might need to 
be harnessed in differential ways across child development to optimize learning.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13005
PMID: 32524703


89. Dev Sci. 2020 Mar;23(2):e12896. doi: 10.1111/desc.12896. Epub 2019 Sep 9.

Statistical learning of multiple speech streams: A challenge for monolingual 
infants.

Benitez VL(1), Bulgarelli F(2)(3), Byers-Heinlein K(4), Saffran JR(5), Weiss 
DJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(2)Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(3)Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA.
(4)Concordia University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(5)University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.

Language acquisition depends on the ability to detect and track the 
distributional properties of speech. Successful acquisition also necessitates 
detecting changes in those properties, which can occur when the learner 
encounters different speakers, topics, dialects, or languages. When encountering 
multiple speech streams with different underlying statistics but overlapping 
features, how do infants keep track of the properties of each speech stream 
separately? In four experiments, we tested whether 8-month-old monolingual 
infants (N = 144) can track the underlying statistics of two artificial speech 
streams that share a portion of their syllables. We first presented each stream 
individually. We then presented the two speech streams in sequence, without 
contextual cues signaling the different speech streams, and subsequently added 
pitch and accent cues to help learners track each stream separately. The results 
reveal that monolingual infants experience difficulty tracking the statistical 
regularities in two speech streams presented sequentially, even when provided 
with contextual cues intended to facilitate separation of the speech streams. We 
discuss the implications of our findings for understanding how infants learn and 
separate the input when confronted with multiple statistical structures.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12896
PMCID: PMC7028448
PMID: 31444822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement The authors do 
not have any conflicts of interest to report.


90. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12975. doi: 10.1111/desc.12975. Epub 2020 May 18.

How chimpanzees and children perceive other species' bodies: Comparing the 
expert effect.

Gao J(1)(2), Tomonaga M(1).

Author information:
(1)Primate Research Institute, Kyoto University, Inuyama, Japan.
(2)Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Tokyo, Japan.

Human adults are better at recognizing upright bodies than inverted bodies. This 
inversion effect is also found for objects with which they have expertise, which 
is called the expert effect. This study aims to investigate its evolutionary and 
developmental aspects by testing humans' closest relatives, chimpanzees, and 
preschool children. Chimpanzees show the inversion effect to chimpanzee bodies, 
but it is not clear how they perceive other species' bodies. We tested seven 
chimpanzees in matching-to-sample tasks on touch screens using upright and 
inverted stimuli, and examined their accuracy and response time. In a previous 
study, they did not show the inversion effect for bipedal humans in unfamiliar 
postures, but here in this study they showed it to bipedal humans with familiar 
postures or crawling postures. This suggests the existence of the expert effect 
in non-human primates, and that visual or embodied experience is needed to 
invoke it. It is also supported by the inversion effect they exhibit for horses 
who share quadrupedal postures, but which they have never seen. Additionally, 
for conspecifics, the inversion effect was shown regardless of the postures. We 
tested 33 preschool children using a similar method. They showed the inversion 
effect to human bodies, but not houses, suggesting the configural processing for 
bodies, which is found to be stable at the preschool stage. They also showed the 
inversion effect for chimpanzees and horses, indicating the important role of 
experience in shaping the ways of object processing.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12975
PMID: 32333446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep 15:e13036. doi: 10.1111/desc.13036. Online ahead of print.

The sticky mittens paradigm: A critical appraisal of current results and 
explanations.

van den Berg L(1), Gredebäck G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Almost two decades ago, the sticky mittens paradigm was demonstrated as a way to 
train reaching and grasping behaviors in pre-reaching infants, and consequently 
improve visual attentional abilities. In that first study, Needham and 
colleagues fitted 3-month-old infants with Velcro loop-covered mittens and 
allowed them to interact with Velcro hook-covered toys over the course of 
2 weeks. In this review, we scrutinize the 17 studies that have followed those 
first sticky mittens results in regards to the motor, social perception, and 
visual attentional domains. Furthermore, we discuss the proposed mechanisms of 
the sticky mittens training. Current evidence strongly suggests that sticky 
mittens training facilitates social perception, which is consistent with prior 
correlational work showing links between action production and action 
perception. However, studies targeting motor and visual attentional abilities 
have too diverse results to warrant firm conclusions. We conclude that future 
research should focus on uncovering if there is a connection between sticky 
mittens training and motor behavior.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13036
PMID: 32931065


92. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12946. doi: 10.1111/desc.12946. Epub 2020 Mar 12.

Maximizing research on the adverse effects of child poverty through consensus 
measures.

Pollak SD(1), Wolfe BL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison, WI, USA.
(2)Departments of Economics, Population Health Sciences and Public Affairs, 
University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA.

A variety of new research approaches are providing new ways to better understand 
the developmental mechanisms through which poverty affects children's 
development. However, studies of child poverty often characterize samples using 
different markers of poverty, making it difficult to contrast and reconcile 
findings across studies. Ideally, scientists can maximize the benefits of 
multiple disciplinary approaches if data from different kinds of studies can be 
directly compared and linked. Here, we suggest that individual studies can 
increase their potential usefulness by including a small set of common key 
variables to assess socioeconomic status and family income. These common 
variables can be used to (a) make direct comparisons between studies and (b) 
better enable diversity of subjects and aggregation of data regarding many 
facets of poverty that would be difficult within any single study. If kept 
brief, these items can be easily balanced with the need for investigators to 
creatively address the research questions in their specific study designs. To 
advance this goal, we identify a small set of brief, low-burden consensus 
measures that researchers could include in their studies to increase cross-study 
data compatibility. These US based measures can be adopted for global contexts.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12946
PMCID: PMC7415622
PMID: 32037618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12960. doi: 10.1111/desc.12960. Epub 2020 May 20.

One language or two? Navigating cross-language conflict in statistical word 
segmentation.

Antovich DM(1), Graf Estes K(1).

Author information:
(1)University of California, Davis, Davis, CA, USA.

Bilingual infants must navigate the similarities and differences between their 
languages to achieve native proficiency in childhood. Bilinguals learning to 
find individual words in fluent speech face the possibility of conflicting cues 
to word boundaries across their languages. Despite this challenge, bilingual 
infants typically begin to segment and learn words in both languages around the 
same time as monolinguals. It is possible that early bilingual experience may 
support infants' abilities to track regularities relevant for word segmentation 
separately across their languages. In a dual speech stream statistical word 
segmentation task, we assessed whether 16-month-old infants could track syllable 
co-occurrence regularities in two artificial languages despite conflicting 
information across the languages. We found that bilingual, but not monolingual, 
infants were able to segment the dual speech streams using statistical 
regularities. Although the two language groups did not differ on secondary 
measures of cognitive and linguistic development, bilingual infants' real-world 
experience with bilingual speakers was predictive of their performance in the 
dual language statistical segmentation task.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12960
PMID: 32145042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12953. doi: 10.1111/desc.12953. Epub 2020 Mar 10.

Attachment security differs by later autism spectrum disorder: A prospective 
study.

Martin KB(1), Haltigan JD(2), Ekas N(3), Prince EB(4), Messinger DS(4).

Author information:
(1)Tobii Pro, Reston, VA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Psychology, Texas Christian University, Fort Worth, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA.

Although difficulties with social relationships are key to autism spectrum 
disorder (ASD), no previous study has examined infant attachment security prior 
to ASD diagnosis. We prospectively assessed attachment security at 15 months in 
high-risk infants with later ASD (high-risk/ASD, n = 16), high-risk infants 
without later ASD (high-risk/no-ASD, n = 40), and low-risk infants without later 
ASD (low-risk/no-ASD, n = 39) using the Strange Situation Procedure. 
High-risk/ASD infants were disproportionately more likely to be classified as 
insecure (versus secure) and more likely to be classified as insecure-resistant 
(versus secure or avoidant) than high-risk/no-ASD and low-risk/no-ASD infants. 
High-risk infants with insecure-resistant attachments were over nine times more 
likely to receive an ASD diagnosis than high-risk infants with secure 
attachments. Insecure-resistant attachment in high-risk infants suggests a 
propensity toward negative affect with the parent in conditions of stress. 
Insecure-resistant attachment may prove useful as a potential early index of 
propensity toward ASD diagnosis in high-risk siblings, while insecure-resistant 
attachment in the context of emergent autism may contribute to difficulties 
experienced by children with ASD and their families.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12953
PMID: 32078210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12962. doi: 10.1111/desc.12962. Epub 2020 Apr 20.

(Un)common knowledge: Children use social relationships to determine who knows 
what.

Liberman Z(1), Gerdin E(2), Kinzler KD(3), Shaw A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of California, 
Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

Socially savvy individuals track what they know and what other people likely 
know, and they use this information to navigate the social world. We examine 
whether children expect people to have shared knowledge based on their social 
relationships (e.g., expecting friends to know each other's secrets, expecting 
members of the same cultural group to share cultural knowledge) and we compare 
children's reasoning about shared knowledge to their reasoning about common 
knowledge (e.g., the wrongness of moral violations). In three studies, we told 
4- to 9-year-olds (N = 227) about what a child knew and asked who else knew the 
information: The child's friend (Studies 1-3), the child's schoolmate (Study 1), 
another child from the same national group (Study 2), or the child's sibling 
(Study 3). In all three studies, older children reliably used relationships to 
infer what other people knew. Moreover, with age, children increasingly 
considered both the type of knowledge and an individual's social relationships 
when reporting who knew what. The results provide support for a 'Selective 
Inferences' hypothesis and suggest that children's early attention to social 
relationships facilitates an understanding of how knowledge transfers - an 
otherwise challenging cognitive process.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12962
PMID: 32159917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Dev Sci. 2019 Jul;22(4):e12778. doi: 10.1111/desc.12778. Epub 2018 Dec 18.

Bilingual infants excel at foreign-language talker recognition.

Fecher N(1), Johnson EK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto Mississauga, Mississauga, 
Canada.

Bilingual and monolingual infants differ in how they process linguistic aspects 
of the speech signal. But do they also differ in how they process non-linguistic 
aspects of speech, such as who is talking? Here, we addressed this question by 
testing Canadian monolingual and bilingual 9-month-olds on their ability to 
learn to identify native Spanish-speaking females in a face-voice matching task. 
Importantly, neither group was familiar with Spanish prior to participating in 
the study. In line with our predictions, bilinguals succeeded in learning the 
face-voice pairings, whereas monolinguals did not. We consider multiple 
explanations for this finding, including the possibility that simultaneous 
bilingualism enhances perceptual attentiveness to talker-specific speech cues in 
infancy (even in unfamiliar languages), and that early bilingualism delays 
perceptual narrowing to language-specific talker recognition cues. This work 
represents the first evidence that multilingualism in infancy affects the 
processing of non-linguistic aspects of the speech signal, such as talker 
identity.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12778
PMID: 30485599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Dev Sci. 2020 Jul;23(4):e12929. doi: 10.1111/desc.12929. Epub 2020 Jan 9.

Disentangling the far transfer of language comprehension gains using latent 
mediation models.

Melby-Lervåg M(1), Hagen ÅM(1), Lervåg A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Special Needs Education, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Department of Education, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

While we know that interventions targeting oral language can be effective, 
little is known about what drives these effects. In this study, we examine 
whether gains in transfer measures are mediated through the specific words that 
are trained in a language intervention. Based on a large-scale randomized 
controlled trial of language intervention in 4- to 5-year-old children, latent 
mediation models were used to disentangle oral language gains in transfer 
measures. The results first showed that the effects of the language intervention 
and the transfer effects are generated through expressive rather than receptive 
measures of language. Second, we found that the effects of the intervention on 
intermediate transfer measures of language were mediated through the ability to 
define the trained words. Third, and critically, for far transfer measures that 
did not contain any of the trained words, the effects were mediated through the 
trained words. The findings relate to theories of transfer and support the idea 
that far transfer is possible, at least within the same domain. In addition, it 
seems that effects on receptive language skills are difficult to obtain and that 
what is improved is instead the children's ability to express themselves and use 
procedures to explain words. Thus, to optimize intervention effects, future 
studies should focus on expressive language.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12929
PMID: 31811692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Dev Sci. 2019 Nov;22(6):e12821. doi: 10.1111/desc.12821. Epub 2019 Mar 13.

The beneficial effect of synchronized action on motor and perceptual timing in 
children.

Monier F(1), Droit-Volet S(1), Coull JT(2).

Author information:
(1)CNRS UMR 6024, Université Clermont Auvergne, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(2)Laboratoire de Neurosciences Cognitives (LNC) UMR 7291, Aix-Marseille 
Université & CNRS, Marseille, France.

We examined the role of action in motor and perceptual timing across 
development. Adults and children aged 5 or 8 years old learned the duration of a 
rhythmic interval with or without concurrent action. We compared the effects of 
sensorimotor versus visual learning on subsequent timing behaviour in three 
different tasks: rhythm reproduction (Experiment 1), rhythm discrimination 
(Experiment 2) and interval discrimination (Experiment 3). Sensorimotor learning 
consisted of sensorimotor synchronization (tapping) to an isochronous visual 
rhythmic stimulus (ISI = 800 ms), whereas visual learning consisted of simply 
observing this rhythmic stimulus. Results confirmed our hypothesis that 
synchronized action during learning systematically benefitted subsequent timing 
performance, particularly for younger children. Action-related improvements in 
accuracy were observed for both motor and perceptual timing in 5 years olds and 
for perceptual timing in the two older age groups. Benefits on perceptual timing 
tasks indicate that action shapes the cognitive representation of interval 
duration. Moreover, correlations with neuropsychological scores indicated that 
while timing performance in the visual learning condition depended on motor and 
memory capacity, sensorimotor learning facilitated an accurate representation of 
time independently of individual differences in motor and memory skill. Overall, 
our findings support the idea that action helps children to construct an 
independent and flexible representation of time, which leads to coupled 
sensorimotor coding for action and time.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12821
PMID: 30803107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Dev Sci. 2019 Nov;22(6):e12834. doi: 10.1111/desc.12834. Epub 2019 May 10.

Physical home environment is associated with prefrontal cortical thickness in 
adolescents.

Uy JP(1), Goldenberg D(1), Tashjian SM(1), Do KT(1), Galván A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
California.

Biologically embedded experiences alter developmental trajectories in ways that 
can influence health, learning, and/or behavior. These systematic differences in 
experiences may contribute to different biological outcomes as individuals grow 
and develop, including at the neural level. Previous studies of biologically 
embedded experiences on neurodevelopment have focused on large-scale 
institutional or economic factors (e.g. socioeconomic status [SES]) and 
psychosocial factors (e.g. caregiving behavior). Less attention has focused on 
how the quality of the immediate home settings, such as the physical home 
environment (PHYS), influences neurodevelopment. Moreover, no study has 
investigated these effects in adolescents, who undergo significant physical 
maturation and neurodevelopment that may influence how they respond to their 
physical environments. The goal of the current study was to examine whether PHYS 
quality is biologically embedded in the developing adolescent brain as evidenced 
by cognitive achievement and cortical development in 56 (48% female) healthy 
adolescents (14-18 years (M = 16.83 years, SD = 1.17). Using in-home assessments 
of the physical home environment, anatomical brain scans, and indices of 
academic achievement, we found that adolescents who have more physical problems 
in the home (e.g. structural hazards, crowding, excessive noise, poorly lit) 
have thinner prefrontal cortices, which was associated with lower levels of 
reading achievement, independent of SES and psychosocial factors. By conducting 
home visits to assess physical characteristics of adolescents' home, we 
highlight a typically overlooked aspect of the home environment that has 
relevance for adolescents' cognitive and brain development.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12834
PMID: 30964952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Dev Sci. 2020 May;23(3):e12926. doi: 10.1111/desc.12926. Epub 2020 Jan 21.

Just banter? Friendship, teasing and experimental aggression in adolescent peer 
networks.

Burnett Heyes S(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.

Aggressive behaviour serves many useful social functions, yet can also have 
damaging consequences. In line with evidence showing adolescent development in 
social cognitive abilities, we hypothesized that the use of aggression would 
become more sophisticated with age. We investigated adolescent aggression 
towards peers using an experimental, hypothetical aggression paradigm, the hot 
sauce paradigm, in a school-based social network setting. Participants (N = 162 
aged 11-17, 98 male) indicated which strength of imaginary hot sauce they would 
allocate to each of their classmates. A Social Network Questionnaire quantified 
participants' perceived dyadic social tie strength with each classmate, and the 
incidence of mutual or unilateral dyadic real-world aggression (e.g. teasing). 
Participants allocated weaker hot sauce to peers with whom they reported strong, 
positive social ties and an absence of self-reported unilateral real-world 
aggression. With increasing cross-sectional age, there was a decrease in the 
impact of social tie strength and an increase in the extent to which hot sauce 
allocation was predicted by self-reported mutual real-world aggression. This 
pattern of findings is consistent with young (vs. late) adolescent use of 
experimental, hypothetical Hot Sauce aggression to reflect real-world animosity, 
while late adolescents' behaviour is more subtle. These findings extend our 
understanding of the dyadic social context of adolescent aggressive behaviour 
using a novel experimental aggression paradigm.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12926
PMID: 31762124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Dev Sci. 2020 Jan;23(1):e12844. doi: 10.1111/desc.12844. Epub 2019 May 27.

Brain structure mediates the association between socioeconomic status and 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.

Machlin L(1), McLaughlin KA(2), Sheridan MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
(2)Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Low socioeconomic status (SES) is associated with greater risk for symptoms of 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). One mechanism through which SES 
may confer risk for ADHD is by influencing brain structure. Alterations to 
cortical thickness, surface area and subcortical volume have been associated 
with low SES and with the presence of ADHD across multiple studies. The current 
study examined whether cortical thickness, surface area or subcortical volume 
mediate the associations between SES and ADHD in youth 3-21 years old (N = 874) 
from the Pediatric Imaging, Neurocognition and Genetics Study. Freesurfer was 
used to estimate cortical thickness, surface area and subcortical volume from 
structural magnetic resonance imaging. Parents reported on demographics, family 
SES, ADHD diagnoses and the presence of child attention problems. Statistical 
mediation was assessed using a bootstrap resampling procedure. Controlling for 
parental ADHD, child age, gender, birth weight and scanner, children in low SES 
families were more likely to be in the ADHD group. Consistent with previous 
reports in this sample, low SES was associated with reduced surface area across 
the frontal lobe and reduced subcortical volume in the amygdala, cerebellum, 
hippocampus and basal ganglia. Of these regions, a significant indirect effect 
of SES on ADHD status through subcortical volume was observed for the left 
cerebellum (95% confidence interval: 0.004, 0.022), the right cerebellum (95% 
confidence interval: 0.006, 0.025), and the right caudate (95% confidence 
interval: 0.002, 0.022). Environmentally mediated changes in the cerebellum and 
the caudate may be neurodevelopmental mechanisms explaining elevated risk of 
ADHD in children in low SES families.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12844
PMCID: PMC6829027
PMID: 31056844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Dev Sci. 2019 Nov;22(6):e12832. doi: 10.1111/desc.12832. Epub 2019 Apr 26.

Pupillometry reveals communication-induced object expectations in 12- but not 
8-month-old infants.

Pätzold W(1), Liszkowski U(1).

Author information:
(1)Fakultät für Psychologie und Bewegungswissenschaft, Universität Hamburg, 
Hamburg, Germany.

Several interaction-based and looking-time studies suggest that 1-year-old 
infants understand the referential nature of deictic gestures. However, these 
studies have not unequivocally established that referential gestures induce 
object expectations in infants prior to encountering a referent object, and have 
thus remained amenable to simpler attentional highlighting interpretations. The 
current study tested whether nonlinguistic referential communication induces 
object expectations in infants by using a novel pupil dilation paradigm. In 
Experiment 1, 12-month-olds watched videos of a protagonist who either pointed 
communicatively toward an occluder in front of her or remained still. At test, 
the occluder opened to reveal one of two outcomes: an empty surface or a toy. 
Results showed that infants' pupils were larger for the unexpected outcome of an 
empty surface following a point compared to the control condition (an empty 
surface following no point). These differences were not caused by differences in 
looking times or directions. In Experiment 2, an attention-directing nonsocial 
control cue replaced the referential communication. The cue did direct 
12-month-olds' attention to the occluder, but it did not induce an object 
expectation. In Experiment 3, we tested 8-month-olds in the setting of 
Experiment 1. In contrast to 12-month-olds, 8-month-olds did not reveal object 
expectations following communication. Findings demonstrate that communicative 
pointing acts induce object expectations at 12 months of age, but not at 
8 months of age, and that these expectations are specific to a 
referential-communicative as opposed to an attention-directing nonsocial cue.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12832
PMID: 30942933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12927. doi: 10.1111/desc.12927. Epub 2019 Dec 17.

Young Mandarin learners use function words to distinguish between nouns and 
verbs.

Ma W(1), Zhou P(2), Golinkoff RM(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Human Environmental Sciences, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, 
AR, USA.
(2)Department of Foreign Languages and Literatures, Tsinghua University, 
Beijing, China.
(3)School of Education and Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences and 
Department of Linguistics and Cognitive Science, University of Delaware, Newark, 
DE, USA.

Mandarin requires neither determiners nor morphological inflections, which casts 
doubt on Mandarin-speaking children's ability to use function words as a 
syntactic bootstrapping tool to identify the form class of a new word. This 
study examined 3- and 5-year-old Mandarin learners' ability to use function 
words to interpret new words as either nouns or verbs in the absence of the 
requirement for determiners and inflections in the ambient language. In 
Experiment 1, 3-, and 5-year-old Mandarin-speaking children were exposed to 
eight novel words embedded in sentence frames differing only in the form class 
markers used. The 5-year-olds interpreted the novel words as either nouns or 
verbs depending on the form class markers they heard, while the 3-year-olds 
learned only the nouns. Experiment 2 confirmed that the 5-year-olds understood 
the function of the verb-marker. Thus, Mandarin-speaking children can use 
function words to distinguish nouns versus verbs, and this ability appears 
between three and five years of age.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12927
PMID: 31793739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Dev Sci. 2020 May;23(3):e12919. doi: 10.1111/desc.12919. Epub 2019 Nov 22.

What leads to coordinated attention in parent-toddler interactions? Children's 
hearing status matters.

Chen CH(1), Castellanos I(1)(2), Yu C(3), Houston DM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(2)Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA.
(3)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 
Bloomington, IN, USA.

Coordinated attention between children and their parents plays an important role 
in their social, language, and cognitive development. The current study used 
head-mounted eye-trackers to investigate the effects of children's prelingual 
hearing loss on how they achieve coordinated attention with their hearing 
parents during free-flowing object play. We found that toddlers with hearing 
loss (age: 24-37 months) had similar overall gaze patterns (e.g., gaze length 
and proportion of face looking) as their normal-hearing peers. In addition, 
children's hearing status did not affect how likely parents and children 
attended to the same object at the same time during play. However, when 
following parents' attention, children with hearing loss used both parents' gaze 
directions and hand actions as cues, whereas children with normal hearing mainly 
relied on parents' hand actions. The diversity of pathways leading to 
coordinated attention suggests the flexibility and robustness of developing 
systems in using multiple pathways to achieve the same functional end.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12919
PMCID: PMC7160036
PMID: 31680414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement We declare that 
we have no conflict of interest.


105. Dev Sci. 2019 Jul;22(4):e12802. doi: 10.1111/desc.12802. Epub 2019 Feb 20.

Newborns are sensitive to multiple cues for word segmentation in continuous 
speech.

Fló A(1)(2), Brusini P(1)(3), Macagno F(4), Nespor M(1), Mehler J(1), Ferry 
AL(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Language, Cognition, and Development Laboratory, Scuola Internazionale di 
Studi Avanzati, Trieste, Italy.
(2)Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit, Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique (CEA), 
Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U992, 
NeuroSpin Center, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(3)Institute of Psychology Health and Society, University of Liverpool, 
Liverpool, UK.
(4)Neonatology Unit, Azienda Ospedaliera Santa Maria della Misericordia, Udine, 
Italy.
(5)Division of Human Communication, Hearing, and Development, University of 
Manchester, Manchester, UK.

Before infants can learn words, they must identify those words in continuous 
speech. Yet, the speech signal lacks obvious boundary markers, which poses a 
potential problem for language acquisition (Swingley, Philos Trans R Soc Lond. 
Series B, Biol Sci 364(1536), 3617-3632, 2009). By the middle of the first year, 
infants seem to have solved this problem (Bergelson & Swingley, Proc Natl Acad 
Sci 109(9), 3253-3258, 2012; Jusczyk & Aslin, Cogn Psychol 29, 1-23, 1995), but 
it is unknown if segmentation abilities are present from birth, or if they only 
emerge after sufficient language exposure and/or brain maturation. Here, in two 
independent experiments, we looked at two cues known to be crucial for the 
segmentation of human speech: the computation of statistical co-occurrences 
between syllables and the use of the language's prosody. After a brief 
familiarization of about 3 min with continuous speech, using functional 
near-infrared spectroscopy, neonates showed differential brain responses on a 
recognition test to words that violated either the statistical (Experiment 1) or 
prosodic (Experiment 2) boundaries of the familiarization, compared to words 
that conformed to those boundaries. Importantly, word recognition in Experiment 
2 occurred even in the absence of prosodic information at test, meaning that 
newborns encoded the phonological content independently of its prosody. These 
data indicate that humans are born with operational language processing and 
memory capacities and can use at least two types of cues to segment otherwise 
continuous speech, a key first step in language acquisition.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12802
PMID: 30681763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Dev Sci. 2019 Jul;22(4):e12794. doi: 10.1111/desc.12794. Epub 2019 Jan 15.

Bilingual toddlers' comprehension of mixed sentences is asymmetrical across 
their two languages.

Potter CE(1), Fourakis E(1), Morin-Lessard E(2), Byers-Heinlein K(2), 
Lew-Williams C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey.
(2)Concordia University, Montreal, QC, Canada.

In bilingual language environments, infants and toddlers listen to two separate 
languages during the same key years that monolingual children listen to just one 
and bilinguals rarely learn each of their two languages at the same rate. 
Learning to understand language requires them to cope with challenges not found 
in monolingual input, notably the use of two languages within the same utterance 
(e.g., Do you like the perro? or ¿Te gusta el doggy?). For bilinguals of all 
ages, switching between two languages can reduce the efficiency in real-time 
language processing. But language switching is a dynamic phenomenon in bilingual 
environments, presenting the young learner with many junctures where 
comprehension can be derailed or even supported. In this study, we tested 20 
Spanish-English bilingual toddlers (18- to 30-months) who varied substantially 
in language dominance. Toddlers' eye movements were monitored as they looked at 
familiar objects and listened to single-language and mixed-language sentences in 
both of their languages. We found asymmetrical switch costs when toddlers were 
tested in their dominant versus non-dominant language, and critically, they 
benefited from hearing nouns produced in their dominant language, independent of 
switching. While bilingualism does present unique challenges, our results 
suggest a united picture of early monolingual and bilingual learning. Just like 
monolinguals, experience shapes bilingual toddlers' word knowledge, and with 
more robust representations, toddlers are better able to recognize words in 
diverse sentences.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12794
PMCID: PMC6570532
PMID: 30582256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


107. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12976. doi: 10.1111/desc.12976. Epub 2020 May 13.

Infants of mothers with higher physiological stress show alterations in brain 
function.

Troller-Renfree SV(1), Brito NH(2), Desai PM(1), Leon-Santos AG(3), Wiltshire 
CA(1), Motton SN(1), Meyer JS(4), Isler J(5), Fifer WP(5), Noble KG(1).

Author information:
(1)Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(2)New York University, New York, NY, USA.
(3)NORC at the University of Chicago, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA.
(5)Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.

Chronic stress has been increasingly linked with aberrations in children's 
behavioral, cognitive, and social development, yet the effect of chronic 
physiological stress on neural development during the first year of life is 
largely unknown. The present study aims to link a physiological index of chronic 
stress (maternal hair cortisol concentration) to maturational differences in 
infant functional brain development during the first year of life. Participants 
were 94 mother-infant dyads. To index chronic physiological stress, maternal 
hair samples were assayed for the previous three months' cortisol output. To 
examine the development of brain function during the first year of life, 
six-to-twelve-month-old infants (N = 94) completed a resting 
electroencephalography (EEG) recording. Infants of mothers with evidence of 
higher physiological stress showed increased relative low-frequency (theta) 
power and reduced relative high-frequency (alpha, high-gamma) power, compared to 
infants of mothers with evidence of low physiological stress. This pattern of 
findings is consistent with other studies suggesting that early life stress may 
lead to alterations in patterns of infant brain development. These findings are 
important given that maturational lags in brain development can be long-lasting 
and are associated with deficits in cognitive and emotional development. The 
present research also suggests that reducing maternal physiological stress may 
be a useful target for future interventions aiming to foster neurodevelopment 
during the first year of life.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12976
PMID: 32329125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Dev Sci. 2020 Jan;23(1):e12883. doi: 10.1111/desc.12883. Epub 2019 Jul 26.

Learning through observing: Effects of modeling truth- and lie-telling on 
children's honesty.

Engarhos P(1), Shohoudi A(2), Crossman A(3), Talwar V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Educational and Counselling Psychology, McGill University, 
Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Psychology, John Jay College, The City University of New York, 
New York, New York.

The current study examined the influence of observing another's lie- or 
truth-telling - and its consequences - on children's own honesty about a 
transgression. Children (N = 224, 5-8 years of age) observed an experimenter (E) 
tell the truth or lie about a minor transgression in one of five conditions: (a) 
Truth-Positive Outcome - E told the truth with a positive outcome; (b) 
Truth-Negative Outcome - E told the truth with a negative outcome; (c) 
Lie-Positive Outcome - E lied with a positive outcome; (d) Lie-Negative Outcome 
- E lied with a negative outcome; (e) Control - E did not tell a lie or tell the 
truth. Later, to examine children's truth- or lie-telling behavior, children 
participated in a temptation resistance paradigm where they were told not to 
peek at a trivia question answer. They either peeked or not, and subsequently 
lied or told the truth about that behavior. Additionally, children were asked to 
give moral evaluations of different truth- and lie-telling vignettes. Overall, 
85% of children lied. Children were less likely to lie about their own 
transgression in the TRP when they had previously witnessed the experimenter 
tell the truth with a positive outcome or tell a lie with a negative outcome.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12883
PMID: 31254425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12679. doi: 10.1111/desc.12679. Epub 2018 May 11.

The mental timeline is gradually constructed in childhood.

Tillman KA(1)(2), Tulagan N(1)(3), Fukuda E(1), Barner D(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego, California, 
USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, 
USA.
(3)School of Education, University of California, Irvine, California, USA.
(4)Department of Linguistics, University of California, San Diego, California, 
USA.

When reasoning about time, English-speaking adults often invoke a "mental 
timeline" stretching from left to right. Although the direction of the timeline 
varies across cultures, the tendency to represent time as a line has been argued 
to be ubiquitous and primitive. On this hypothesis, we might predict that 
children also spontaneously invoke a spatial timeline when reasoning about time. 
However, little is known about how and when the mental timeline develops, or to 
what extent it is variable and malleable in childhood. Here, we used a sticker 
placement task to test whether preschoolers and kindergarteners spontaneously 
map temporal events (breakfast, lunch, and dinner) and deictic time words 
(yesterday, today, tomorrow) onto lines, and to what degree their 
representations of time are adult-like. We found that, at age 4, preschoolers 
were able to arrange temporal items in lines with minimal spatial priming. 
However, unlike kindergarteners and adults, most preschoolers did not represent 
time as a line spontaneously, in the absence of priming, and did not prefer 
left-to-right over right-to-left lines. Furthermore, unlike most adults, 
children of all ages could be easily primed to adopt an unconventional vertical 
timeline. Our findings suggest that mappings between time and space in children 
are initially flexible, and become increasingly automatic and conventionalized 
in the early school years.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12679
PMID: 29749676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Dev Sci. 2020 May;23(3):e12915. doi: 10.1111/desc.12915. Epub 2019 Nov 6.

Children learn words easier when they are interested in the category to which 
the word belongs.

Ackermann L(1)(2), Hepach R(3)(4), Mani N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Psychology of Language Research Group, University of Goettingen, Goettingen, 
Germany.
(2)Leibniz ScienceCampus Primate Cognition, Goettingen, Germany.
(3)Department of Research Methods in Early Child Development, Leipzig 
University, Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Leipzig Research Center for Early Child Development, Leipzig University, 
Leipzig, Germany.

The overall pattern of vocabulary development is relatively similar across 
children learning different languages. However, there are considerable 
differences in the words known to individual children. Historically, this 
variability has been explained in terms of differences in the input. Here, we 
examine the alternate possibility that children's individual interest in 
specific natural categories shapes the words they are likely to learn - a child 
who is more interested in animals will learn a new animal name easier relative 
to a new vehicle name. Two-year-old German-learning children (N = 39) were 
exposed to four novel word-object associations for objects from four different 
categories. Prior to the word learning task, we measured their interest in the 
categories that the objects belonged to. Our measure was pupillary change 
following exposure to familiar objects from these four categories, with 
increased pupillary change interpreted as increased interest in that category. 
Children showed more robust learning of word-object associations from categories 
they were more interested in relative to categories they were less interested 
in. We further found that interest in the novel objects themselves influenced 
learning, with distinct influences of both category interest and object interest 
on learning. These results suggest that children's interest in different natural 
categories shapes their word learning. This provides evidence for the strikingly 
intuitive possibility that a child who is more interested in animals will learn 
novel animal names easier than a child who is more interested in vehicles.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12915
PMID: 31618505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Dev Sci. 2020 May;23(3):e12917. doi: 10.1111/desc.12917. Epub 2019 Nov 19.

Socioeconomic status and executive function in early childhood: Exploring 
proximal mechanisms.

Vrantsidis DM(1), Clark CAC(2), Chevalier N(3), Espy KA(4), Wiebe SA(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(2)Department of Educational Psychology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 
Lincoln, NE, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(4)Office of the Provost, University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, 
USA.
(5)Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute, University of Alberta, Edmonton, 
AB, Canada.

Although there is substantial evidence that socioeconomic status (SES) predicts 
children's executive function (EF), the mechanisms underlying this association 
are poorly understood. This study tested the utility of two theories proposed to 
link SES to children's EF: the family stress model and the family investment 
model. Data came from the Midwestern Infant Development Study (N = 151). To 
measure SES, parental education and income were assessed during pregnancy, and 
income was also assessed when children were 6 and 36 months old. Children's EF, 
operationalized as working memory/inhibitory control (WMIC) and self-control, 
was assessed at 36 months of age, along with potential mediators including 
maternal psychological distress, harsh parenting, and cognitive stimulation. 
Using structural equation modeling, we tested simultaneous pathways from SES to 
EF: (a) via maternal psychological distress to harsh parenting (family stress 
model) and (b) via cognitive stimulation (family investment model). Of the SES 
measures, lower education predicted poorer WMIC directly and indirectly via 
greater maternal psychological distress. Lower education also predicted poorer 
self-control via greater maternal psychological distress. This effect was 
partially suppressed by an indirect path from lower education to better 
self-control via greater psychological distress and increased harsh parenting. 
Cognitive stimulation did not act as a mediator. Income was not directly or 
indirectly associated with EF. These findings provide partial support for the 
family stress model and suggest that family functioning is an important proximal 
mechanism for children's EF development. This study also highlights the 
importance of considering SES as a multidimensional construct.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12917
PMID: 31680392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Dev Sci. 2020 Mar;23(2):e12890. doi: 10.1111/desc.12890. Epub 2019 Aug 27.

Visual configural processing in adults born at extremely low birth weight.

Mathewson KJ(1), Maurer D(1), Mondloch CJ(2), Saigal S(3), Van Lieshout RJ(4), 
Schmidt LA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Neuroscience and Behaviour, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology, Brock University, St. Catharines, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Neurosciences, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada.

Being born at extremely low birth weight (ELBW; ≤1,000 g) is associated with 
enduring visual impairments. We tested for long-term, higher order visual 
processing problems in the oldest known prospectively followed cohort of ELBW 
survivors. Configural processing (spacing among features of an object) was 
examined in 62 adults born at ELBW (Mage  = 31.9 years) and 82 adults born at 
normal birth weight (NBW; ≥2,500 g: Mage  = 32.5 years). Pairs of human faces, 
monkey faces, or houses were presented in a delayed match-to-sample task, where 
non-matching stimuli differed only in the spacing of their features. 
Discrimination accuracy for each stimulus type was compared between birth weight 
groups, adjusting for neurosensory impairment, visual acuity, binocular fusion 
ability, IQ, and sex. Both groups were better able to discriminate human faces 
than monkey faces (p < .001). However, the ELBW group discriminated between 
human faces (p < .001), between monkey faces (p < .001), and to some degree, 
between houses (p < .06), more poorly than NBW control participants, suggesting 
a general deficit in perceptual processing. Human face discrimination was 
related to performance IQ (PIQ) across groups, but especially among ELBW 
survivors. Coding (a PIQ subtest) also predicted human face discrimination in 
ELBW survivors, consistent with previously reported links between 
visuo-perceptive difficulties and regional slowing of cortical activity in 
individuals born preterm. Correlations with Coding suggested ELBW survivors may 
have used a feature-matching approach to processing human faces. Future studies 
could examine brain-based anatomical and functional evidence for altered face 
processing, as well as the social and memory consequences of face-processing 
deficits in ELBW survivors.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12890
PMCID: PMC6983349
PMID: 31350857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Dev Sci. 2019 Jul;22(4):e12780. doi: 10.1111/desc.12780. Epub 2018 Dec 27.

Prediction in infants and adults: A pupillometry study.

Zhang F(1), Jaffe-Dax S(1), Wilson RC(2)(3), Emberson LL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona.
(3)Cognitive Science Program, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona.

Adults use both bottom-up sensory inputs and top-down signals to generate 
predictions about future sensory inputs. Infants have also been shown to make 
predictions with simple stimuli and recent work has suggested top-down 
processing is available early in infancy. However, it is unknown whether this 
indicates that top-down prediction is an ability that is continuous across the 
lifespan or whether an infant's ability to predict is different from an adult's, 
qualitatively or quantitatively. We employed pupillometry to provide a direct 
comparison of prediction abilities across these disparate age groups. Pupil 
dilation response (PDR) was measured in 6-month olds and adults as they 
completed an identical implicit learning task designed to help learn 
associations between sounds and pictures. We found significantly larger PDR for 
visual omission trials (i.e. trials that violated participants' predictions 
without the presentation of new stimuli to control for bottom-up signals) 
compared to visual present trials (i.e. trials that confirmed participants' 
predictions) in both age groups. Furthermore, a computational learning model 
that is closely linked to prediction error (Rescorla-Wagner model) demonstrated 
similar learning trajectories suggesting a continuity of predictive capacity and 
learning across the two age groups.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12780
PMCID: PMC7294578
PMID: 30506618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST None.


114. Dev Sci. 2020 Mar;23(2):e12897. doi: 10.1111/desc.12897. Epub 2019 Sep 5.

Do infants have a sense of numerosity? A p-curve analysis of infant numerosity 
discrimination studies.

Smyth RE(1), Ansari D(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, Western University, London, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology, Western University, London, ON, Canada.
(3)Brain and Mind Institute, Western University, London, ON, Canada.

Research demonstrating that infants discriminate between small (e.g., 1 vs. 3 
dots) and large numerosities (e.g., 8 vs. 16 dots) is central to theories 
concerning the origins of human numerical abilities. To date, there has been no 
quantitative meta-analysis of the infant numerical competency data. Here, we 
quantitatively synthesize the evidential value of the available literature on 
infant numerosity discrimination using a meta-analytic tool called p-curve. In 
p-curve the distribution of available p-values is analyzed to determine whether 
the published literature examining particular hypotheses contains evidential 
value. p-curves demonstrated evidential value for the hypotheses that infants 
can discriminate between both small and large unimodal and cross-modal 
numerosities. However, the analyses also revealed that the published data on 
infants' ability to discriminate between large numerosities is less robust and 
statistically powered than the data on their ability to discriminate small 
numerosities. We argue there is a need for adequately powered replication 
studies to enable stronger inferences in order to use infant data to ground 
theories concerning the ontogenesis of numerical cognition.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12897
PMID: 31448505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Dev Sci. 2020 Jan;23(1):e12873. doi: 10.1111/desc.12873. Epub 2019 Jun 20.

'Something in the way you move': Infants are sensitive to emotions conveyed in 
action kinematics.

Addabbo M(1), Vacaru SV(2), Meyer M(3), Hunnius S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milano, Italy.
(2)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radbound University, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.

Body movements, as well as faces, communicate emotions. Research in adults has 
shown that the perception of action kinematics has a crucial role in 
understanding others' emotional experiences. Still, little is known about 
infants' sensitivity to body emotional expressions, since most of the research 
in infancy focused on faces. While there is some first evidence that infants can 
recognize emotions conveyed in whole-body postures, it is still an open question 
whether they can extract emotional information from action kinematics. We 
measured electromyographic (EMG) activity over the muscles involved in happy 
(zygomaticus major, ZM), angry (corrugator supercilii, CS) and fearful 
(frontalis, F) facial expressions, while 11-month-old infants observed the same 
action performed with either happy or angry kinematics. Results demonstrate that 
infants responded to angry and happy kinematics with matching facial reactions. 
In particular, ZM activity increased while CS activity decreased in response to 
happy kinematics and vice versa for angry kinematics. Our results show for the 
first time that infants can rely on kinematic information to pick up on the 
emotional content of an action. Thus, from very early in life, action kinematics 
represent a fundamental and powerful source of information in revealing others' 
emotional state.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12873
PMID: 31144771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12952. doi: 10.1111/desc.12952. Epub 2020 Mar 12.

Orthographic consistency influences morphological processing in reading aloud: 
Evidence from a cross-linguistic study.

Mousikou P(1)(2), Beyersmann E(3)(4), Ktori M(5), Javourey-Drevet L(4)(6), 
Crepaldi D(5), Ziegler JC(4), Grainger J(4), Schroeder S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Human Development (MPIB), Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Educational Psychology, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, 
Germany.
(3)Department of Cognitive Science and Macquarie University Centre for Reading, 
Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(4)Laboratoire de Psychologie Cognitive, Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique (CNRS), Aix-Marseille University, Marseille, France.
(5)International School for Advanced Studies (SISSA), Trieste, Italy.
(6)Laboratoire Apprentissage, Didactique, Évaluation, Formation, Aix-Marseille 
University, Marseille, France.

The present study investigated whether morphological processing in reading is 
influenced by the orthographic consistency of a language or its morphological 
complexity. Developing readers in Grade 3 and skilled adult readers participated 
in a reading aloud task in four alphabetic orthographies (English, French, 
German, Italian), which differ in terms of both orthographic consistency and 
morphological complexity. English is the least consistent, in terms of its 
spelling-to-sound relationships, as well as the most morphologically sparse, 
compared to the other three. Two opposing hypotheses were formulated. If 
orthographic consistency modulated the use of morphology in reading, readers of 
English should show more robust morphological processing than readers of the 
other three languages, because morphological units increase the reliability of 
spelling-to-sound mappings in the English language. In contrast, if the use of 
morphology in reading depended on the morphological complexity of a language, 
readers of French, German, and Italian should process morphological units in 
printed letter strings more efficiently than readers of English. Both developing 
and skilled readers of English showed greater morphological processing than 
readers of the other three languages. These results support the idea that the 
orthographic consistency of a language, rather than its morphological 
complexity, influences the extent to which morphology is used during reading. We 
explain our findings within the remit of extant theories of reading acquisition 
and outline their theoretical and educational implications.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12952
PMID: 32061144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Dev Sci. 2020 Dec 28:e13079. doi: 10.1111/desc.13079. Online ahead of print.

Scaffolded reaching can encourage motor development: Commentary on van den Berg 
& gredebäck (2020).

Libertus K(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Recent findings regarding the effectiveness of sticky mittens training as a 
motor intervention have been mixed. This commentary argues that despite 
inconsistent results, overall patterns suggest that sticky mittens may 
facilitate reaching behavior. More research on this topic is needed.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13079
PMID: 33370484


118. Dev Sci. 2020 Mar;23(2):e12889. doi: 10.1111/desc.12889. Epub 2019 Aug 6.

Development of dopaminergic genetic associations with visuospatial, verbal and 
social working memory.

Dumontheil I(1), Kilford EJ(2), Blakemore SJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Sciences, Centre for Brain and Cognitive 
Development, Birkbeck, University of London, London, UK.
(2)Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, London, UK.

Dopamine transmission in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) supports working memory 
(WM), the temporary holding, processing and manipulation of information in one's 
mind. The gene coding the catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) enzyme, which 
degrades dopamine, in particular in the PFC, has a common single nucleotide 
polymorphism leading to two versions of the COMT enzyme which vary in their 
enzymatic activity. The methionine (Met) allele has been associated with higher 
WM performance and lower activation of the PFC in executive function tasks than 
the valine (Val) allele. In a previous study, COMT genotype was associated with 
performance on verbal and visuospatial WM tasks in adults, as well as with 
performance on a novel social WM paradigm that requires participants to maintain 
and manipulate information about the traits of their friends or family over a 
delay. Here, data collected in children and adolescents (N = 202) were compared 
to data from the adult sample (N = 131) to investigate possible age differences 
in genetic associations. Our results replicate and extend previous work showing 
that the pattern of superior WM performance observed in Met/Met adults emerges 
during development. These findings are consistent with a decrease in prefrontal 
dopamine levels during adolescence. Developmentally moderated genetic effects 
were observed for both visuospatial and social WM, even when controlling for 
non-social WM performance, suggesting that the maintenance and manipulation of 
social information may also recruit the dopamine neurotransmitter system. These 
findings show that development should be considered when trying to understand 
the impact of genetic polymorphisms on cognitive function.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12889
PMCID: PMC7064996
PMID: 31336006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


119. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e12997. doi: 10.1111/desc.12997. Epub 2020 Jun 16.

The moment-to-moment pitch dynamics of child-directed speech shape toddlers' 
attention and learning.

Nencheva ML(1), Piazza EA(1)(2), Lew-Williams C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA.
(2)Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA.

Young children have an overall preference for child-directed speech (CDS) over 
adult-directed speech (ADS), and its structural features are thought to 
facilitate language learning. Many studies have supported these findings, but 
less is known about processing of CDS at short, sub-second timescales. How do 
the moment-to-moment dynamics of CDS influence young children's attention and 
learning? In Study 1, we used hierarchical clustering to characterize patterns 
of pitch variability in a natural CDS corpus, which uncovered four main 
word-level contour shapes: 'fall', 'rise', 'hill', and 'valley'. In Study 2, we 
adapted a measure from adult attention research-pupil size synchrony-to quantify 
real-time attention to speech across participants, and found that toddlers 
showed higher synchrony to the dynamics of CDS than to ADS. Importantly, there 
were consistent differences in toddlers' attention when listening to the four 
word-level contour types. In Study 3, we found that pupil size synchrony during 
exposure to novel words predicted toddlers' learning at test. This suggests that 
the dynamics of pitch in CDS not only shape toddlers' attention but guide their 
learning of new words. By revealing a physiological response to the real-time 
dynamics of CDS, this investigation yields a new sub-second framework for 
understanding young children's engagement with one of the most important signals 
in their environment.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12997
PMCID: PMC7680269
PMID: 32441385

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement The authors 
declare that there is no conflict of interest


120. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12934. doi: 10.1111/desc.12934. Epub 2020 Mar 9.

Network structure reveals clusters of associations between childhood adversities 
and development outcomes.

Sheridan MA(1), Shi F(1), Miller AB(1), Salhi C(2), McLaughlin KA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology & Neuroscience, University of North Carolina, Chapel 
Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Health Sciences, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Exposure to childhood adversity is common and associated with a host of negative 
developmental outcomes. The most common approach used to examine the 
consequences of adversity exposure is a cumulative risk model. Recently, we have 
proposed a novel approach, the dimensional model of adversity and 
psychopathology (DMAP), where different dimensions of adversity are hypothesized 
to impact health and well-being through different pathways. We expect 
deprivation to primarily disrupt cognitive processing, whereas we expect threat 
to primarily alter emotional reactivity and automatic regulation. Recent 
hypothesis-driven approaches provide support for these differential associations 
of deprivation and threat on developmental outcomes. However, it is not clear 
whether these patterns would emerge using data-driven approaches. Here we use a 
network analytic approach to identify clusters of related adversity exposures 
and outcomes in an initial study (Study 1: N = 277 adolescents aged 16-17 years; 
55.1% female) and a replication (Study 2: N = 262 children aged 8-16 years; 
45.4% female). We statistically compare our observed clusters with our 
hypothesized DMAP model and a clustering we hypothesize would be the result of a 
cumulative stress model. In both samples we observed a network structure 
consistent with the DMAP model and statistically different than the hypothesized 
cumulative stress model. Future work seeking to identify in the pathways through 
which adversity impacts development should consider multiple dimensions of 
adversity.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12934
PMCID: PMC7308216
PMID: 31869484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors have 
no conflicts of interest which impact this work.


121. Dev Sci. 2019 Nov;22(6):e12826. doi: 10.1111/desc.12826. Epub 2019 Apr 5.

School-age outcomes of late-talking toddlers: Long-term effects of an early 
lexical deficit.

Grossheinrich N(1)(2)(3), Schulte-Körne G(1), Marschik PB(4)(5)(6), Kademann 
S(1)(7), von Suchodoletz W(1), Sachse S(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University 
Hospital of the LMU Munich, Munich, Germany.
(2)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Medical Faculty and University 
Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(3)Department of Social Sciences, Institute of Health Research and Social 
Psychiatry, Catholic University of Applied Sciences of North Rhine-Westphalia, 
Cologne, Germany.
(4)iDN - interdisciplinary Developmental Neuroscience, Institute of Physiology, 
Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(5)Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center 
Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany.
(6)Center of Neurodevelopmental Disorders (KIND), Department of Women's and 
Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Little Scientist House, Berlin, Germany.
(8)Institute of Psychology, University of Education Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Early intervention for children identified as late talkers (LTs) at 
the age of 24 months is still a controversial issue in research and clinical 
routine. Previous studies have shown inconsistent results regarding predictors 
of early lexical deficits on school-age outcomes of late-talking toddlers.
METHODS: In a five-wave follow-up study, we investigated various aspects of 
language and literacy abilities in 39 German-speaking third-graders who had been 
identified as LTs at the age of 24 months, compared to 39 typically developing 
children (TDC) also attending the third grade. The duration of auditory sensory 
memory was examined at the age of 4 years using mismatch negativity (MMN) of 
tones - an event-related potential not confounded by any language skill. In 
addition, the predictive value of memory performance was examined in a 
longitudinal perspective.
RESULTS: Overall, LTs scored within normal range in language and literacy 
assessments. However, LTs differed from TDC in vocabulary size, verbalization of 
semantic relations, non-word repetition, and spelling. The findings can be 
explained by phonological working memory. The duration of auditory sensory 
memory and spatial working memory did not account for any variance.
CONCLUSIONS: LTs sustain persistent phonological processing limitations even 
though their native language and literacy performance lay within the normal 
range at school age. Further research on second language acquisition, academic 
achievements, and the efficacy of early intervention in late-talking toddlers is 
recommended.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12826
PMID: 30869184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12955. doi: 10.1111/desc.12955. Epub 2020 Mar 10.

On the domain specificity of the mechanisms underpinning spontaneous 
anticipatory looks in false-belief tasks.

Surian L(1), Franchin L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Cognitive Sciences, University of Trento, 
Trento, Italy.

Many studies proposed that infants' and adults' looking behavior suggest a 
spontaneous and implicit ability to reason about others' beliefs. It has been 
argued, however, that these successes are false positives due to domain-general 
processes, such as retroactive interference. In this study, we investigated the 
domain specificity of mechanisms underpinning participants' looking behavior by 
manipulating the dynamic cues in the event stimuli. Infants aged 15 and 
20 months and adults saw animation events in which either a self-moving 
triangle, or a hand holding an identical inert triangle, chased an animated 
disk. Most 20-month-olds and adults showed belief congruent anticipatory looks 
in the agent-triangle condition, whereas they showed no bias in the inert 
triangle control condition. These results are not consistent with submentalizing 
accounts based on domain-general low-level processes and provide further support 
for domain-specific explanations positing an early-emerging mentalistic 
reasoning.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12955
PMID: 32107820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Dev Sci. 2020 Jul;23(4):e12913. doi: 10.1111/desc.12913. Epub 2019 Nov 3.

Individual differences in the acquisition of non-linguistic audio-visual 
associations in 5 year olds.

Altarelli I(1)(2)(3), Dehaene-Lambertz G(1), Bavelier D(2).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit U992, INSERM, CEA DRF/Institut Joliot, Université 
Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, NeuroSpin Center, Gif/Yvette, France.
(2)Faculty of Psychology and Education Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(3)CNRS UMR 8240, Laboratory for the Psychology of Child Development and 
Education (LaPsyDE), University Paris Descartes, Université de Paris, Paris, 
France.

Audio-visual associative learning - at least when linguistic stimuli are 
employed - is known to rely on core linguistic skills such as phonological 
awareness. Here we ask whether this would also be the case in a task that does 
not manipulate linguistic information. Another question of interest is whether 
executive skills, often found to support learning, may play a larger role in a 
non-linguistic audio-visual associative task compared to a linguistic one. We 
present a new task that measures learning when having to associate 
non-linguistic auditory signals with novel visual shapes. Importantly, our novel 
task shares with linguistic processes such as reading acquisition the need to 
associate sounds with arbitrary shapes. Yet, rather than phonemes or syllables, 
it uses novel environmental sounds - therefore limiting direct reliance on 
linguistic abilities. Five-year-old French-speaking children (N = 76, 39 girls) 
were assessed individually in our novel audio-visual associative task, as well 
as in a number of other cognitive tasks evaluating linguistic abilities and 
executive functions. We found phonological awareness and language comprehension 
to be related to scores in the audio-visual associative task, while no 
correlation with executive functions was observed. These results underscore a 
key relation between foundational language competencies and audio-visual 
associative learning, even in the absence of linguistic input in the associative 
task.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12913
PMID: 31608547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Dev Sci. 2020 Mar;23(2):e12895. doi: 10.1111/desc.12895. Epub 2019 Sep 4.

The role of epistemic and social characteristics in children's selective trust: 
Three meta-analyses.

Tong Y(1), Wang F(1), Danovitch J(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Louisville, 
Louisville, KY, USA.

Over the last 15 years, researchers have been increasingly interested in 
understanding the nature and development of children's selective trust. Three 
meta-analyses were conducted on a total of 51 unique studies (88 experiments) to 
provide a quantitative overview of 3- to 6-year-old children's selective trust 
in an informant based on the informant's epistemic or social characteristics, 
and to examine the relation between age and children's selective trust 
decisions. The first and second meta-analyses found that children displayed 
medium-to-large pooled effects in favor of trusting the informant who was 
knowledgeable or the informant with positive social characteristics. Moderator 
analyses revealed that 4-year-olds were more likely to endorse knowledgeable 
informants than 3-year-olds. The third meta-analysis examined cases where two 
informants simultaneously differed in their epistemic and social 
characteristics. The results revealed that 3-year-old children did not 
selectively endorse informants who were more knowledgeable but had negative 
social characteristics over informants who were less knowledgeable but had 
positive social characteristics. However, 4- to 6-year-olds consistently 
prioritized epistemic cues over social characteristics when deciding who to 
trust. Together, these meta-analyses suggest that epistemic and social 
characteristics are both valuable to children when they evaluate the reliability 
of informants. Moreover, with age, children place greater value on epistemic 
characteristics when deciding whether to endorse an informant's testimony. 
Implications for the development of epistemic trust and the design of studies of 
children's selective trust are discussed.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12895
PMID: 31433880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12933. doi: 10.1111/desc.12933. Epub 2020 Jan 9.

Neural recruitment related to threat perception differs as a function of 
adolescent sleep.

Tashjian SM(1), Galván A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(2)Brain Research Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.

Detecting threat cues in the environment is an important aspect of social 
functioning. This is particularly true for adolescents as social threats become 
more salient and they navigate increasingly complex relationships outside of the 
family. Sleep relates to socioemotional processing throughout development, but 
the neurobiological relevance of sleep for threat perceptions in adolescence 
remains unknown. In the present study, 46 human adolescents (aged 14-18 years; 
26 female) made judgments while undergoing a brain scan about whether 
unfamiliar, affectively neutral, computer-generated faces were threatening. 
Prior to the scan, several indices of sleep were assessed nightly for two-weeks 
using actigraphy. Sleep duration and poor sleep quality (defined as less 
efficiency, more awakenings, longer awakenings), factors influenced by 
biological and psychosocial changes during adolescence, elicited distinct neural 
activation patterns. Sleep duration was positively associated with activation in 
visual and face processing regions (occipital cortex, occipital fusiform gyrus), 
and this activation was linked to increased threat detection during the threat 
perception task. Sleep quality was negatively related to dorsolateral prefrontal 
cortex activation, which moderated the relation between reaction time (RT) and 
exposure to faces. Findings suggest reduced threat perception for adolescents 
with shorter sleep durations and more impulsive responding (as evinced by less 
consistent RT) for adolescents experiencing worse quality sleep. This study 
identifies an association between sleep and neural functioning relevant for 
socioemotional decision making during adolescence, a time when these systems 
undergo significant development.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12933
PMID: 31863619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Dev Sci. 2020 Dec 31:e13080. doi: 10.1111/desc.13080. Online ahead of print.

Elementary school teachers' math anxiety and students' math learning: A 
large-scale replication.

Schaeffer MW(1), Rozek CS(2), Maloney EA(3), Berkowitz T(4), Levine SC(4), 
Beilock SL(5).

Author information:
(1)Saint Mary's College, Notre Dame, IN, USA.
(2)Washington University in Saint Louis, Saint Louis, MO, USA.
(3)University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario.
(4)University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)Barnard College, Columbia University and University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 
USA.

A solid foundation in math is important for children's long-term academic 
success. Many factors influence children's math learning-including the math 
content students are taught in school, the quality of their instruction, and the 
math attitudes of students' teachers. Using a large and diverse sample of 
first-grade students (n = 551), we conducted a large-scale replication of a 
previous study (Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 
2010, 1860; n = 117), which found that girls in classes with highly math anxious 
teachers learned less math during the school year, as compared to girls whose 
math teachers were less anxious about math. With a larger sample, we found a 
negative relation between teachers' math anxiety and students' math achievement 
for both girls and boys, even after accounting for teachers' math ability and 
children's beginning of year math knowledge, replicating and extending those 
previous results. Our findings strengthen the support for the hypothesis that 
teachers' math anxiety is one factor that undermines children's math learning 
and could push students off-track during their initial exposure to math in early 
elementary school.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13080
PMID: 33382186


127. Dev Sci. 2020 Jan;23(1):e12869. doi: 10.1111/desc.12869. Epub 2019 Jun 18.

Motion tracking of parents' infant- versus adult-directed actions reveals 
general and action-specific modulations.

van Schaik JE(1)(2), Meyer M(1)(3), van Ham CR(1), Hunnius S(1).

Author information:
(1)Donders Institute for Brain Cognition and Behavior, Radboud University 
Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Institute of Education and Child Studies, Leiden University, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.

Parents tend to modulate their movements when demonstrating actions to their 
infants. Thus far, these modulations have primarily been quantified by human 
raters and for entire interactions, thereby possibly overlooking the intricacy 
of such demonstrations. Using optical motion tracking, the precise modulations 
of parents' infant-directed actions were quantified and compared to 
adult-directed actions and between action types. Parents demonstrated four novel 
objects to their 14-month-old infants and adult confederates. Each object 
required a specific action to produce a unique effect (e.g. rattling). Parents 
were asked to demonstrate an object at least once before passing it to their 
demonstration partner, and they were subsequently free to exchange the object as 
often as desired. Infants' success at producing the objects' action-effects was 
coded during the demonstration session and their memory of the action-effects 
was tested after a several-minute delay. Indicating general modulations across 
actions, parents repeated demonstrations more often, performed the actions in 
closer proximity and demonstrated action-effects for longer when interacting 
with their infant compared to the adults. Meanwhile, modulations of movement 
size and velocity were specific to certain action-effect pairs. Furthermore, a 
'just right' modulation of proximity was detected, since infants' learning, 
memory, and parents' prior evaluations of their infants' motor abilities, were 
related to demonstrations that were performed neither too far from nor too close 
to the infants. Together, these findings indicate that infant-directed action 
modulations are not solely overall exaggerations but are dependent upon the 
characteristics of the to-be learned actions, their effects, and the infant 
learners.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12869
PMCID: PMC6916206
PMID: 31132212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflict 
of interest.


128. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12967. doi: 10.1111/desc.12967. Epub 2020 Apr 15.

Encouraging kids to beat: Children's beat gesture production boosts their 
narrative performance.

Vilà-Giménez I(1), Prieto P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translation and Language Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(2)Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, 
Catalonia, Spain.

Gesture is an integral part of language development. While recent evidence shows 
that observing a speaker who is simultaneously producing beat gestures helps 
preschoolers remember and understand information and also improves the 
production of oral narratives, little is known about the potential value of 
encouraging children to produce beat gestures-as opposed to merely observing 
them. In this between-subjects pretest-posttest training study we examine 
whether encouraging children to produce beats can boost their narrative 
performance. A total of 47 5- to 6-year-old children were divided into two 
groups and exposed to a training session in which a total of six stories were 
presented under one of two experimental conditions: (a) the children merely 
observed video-recordings of a storyteller who used beat gestures and were then 
asked to retell the narratives; or (b) the children observed the same 
video-recordings and then retold the narratives but were encouraged to 
simultaneously use their hands in the same way the storytellers did. Pretests 
and posttests consisting of children's narrations of short animated cartoons 
were analysed for narrative structure and fluency. A comparison of scores showed 
that children in the group that had been encouraged to use beat gestures in the 
training phase performed better in both narrative structure and fluency than the 
group of children who were simply asked to retell the story without gesture 
instruction. These findings suggest that linguistically relevant body movements 
serve to boost language development and that embodied storytelling can be of 
help in narrative training.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12967
PMID: 32223009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e12982. doi: 10.1111/desc.12982. Epub 2020 May 24.

Evidence for early arousal-based differentiation of emotions in children's 
musical production.

Kragness HE(1)(2)(3), Eitel MJ(1), Baksh AM(1), Trainor LJ(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto Scarborough, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto Mississauga, Mississauga, ON, 
Canada.
(4)McMaster Institute for Music and the Mind, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, 
Canada.
(5)Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Accurate perception and production of emotional states is important for 
successful social interactions across the lifespan. Previous research has shown 
that when identifying emotion in faces, preschool children are more likely to 
confuse emotions that share valence, but differ in arousal (e.g. sadness and 
anger) than emotions that share arousal, but differ on valence (e.g. anger and 
joy). Here, we examined the influence of valence and arousal on children's 
production of emotion in music. Three-, 5- and 7-year-old children recruited 
from the greater Hamilton area (N = 74) 'performed' music to produce emotions 
using a self-pacing paradigm, in which participants controlled the onset and 
offset of each chord in a musical sequence by repeatedly pressing and lifting 
the same key on a MIDI piano. Key press velocity controlled the loudness of each 
chord. Results showed that (a) differentiation of emotions by 5-year-old 
children was mainly driven by arousal of the target emotion, with 
differentiation based on both valence and arousal at 7 years and (b) tempo and 
loudness were used to differentiate emotions earlier in development than 
articulation. The results indicate that the developmental trajectory of emotion 
understanding in music may differ from the developmental trajectory in other 
domains.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12982
PMID: 32358988


130. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e12990. doi: 10.1111/desc.12990. Epub 2020 Jun 23.

Attenuated brain responses to speech sounds in moderate preterm infants at term 
age.

François C(1), Rodriguez-Fornells A(2)(3)(4), Teixidó M(3), Agut T(5)(6), Bosch 
L(3)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire Parole et Langage, Aix-Marseille University, CNRS, 
Aix-en-Provence, France.
(2)Cognition and Brain Plasticity Group, Bellvitge Biomedical Research 
Institute-] IDIBELL, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Department of Cognition, Development and Educational Psychology, University 
of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Catalan Institution for Research and Advanced Studies, ICREA, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(5)Department of Neonatology, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Institute of Neurosciences (UBNeuro), University of Barcelona, Barcelona, 
Spain.

Recent findings have revealed that very preterm neonates already show the 
typical brain responses to place of articulation changes in stop consonants, but 
data on their sensitivity to other types of phonetic changes remain scarce. 
Here, we examined the impact of 7-8 weeks of extra-uterine life on the automatic 
processing of syllables in 20 healthy moderate preterm infants (mean gestational 
age at birth 33 weeks) matched in maturational age with 20 full-term neonates, 
thus differing in their previous auditory experience. This design allows 
elucidating the contribution of extra-uterine auditory experience in the 
immature brain on the encoding of linguistically relevant speech features. 
Specifically, we collected brain responses to natural CV syllables differing in 
three dimensions using a multi-feature mismatch paradigm, with the syllable/ba/ 
as the standard and three deviants: a pitch change, a vowel change to/bo/ and a 
consonant voice-onset time (VOT) change to/pa/. No significant between-group 
differences were found for pitch and consonant VOT deviants. However, moderate 
preterm infants showed attenuated responses to vowel deviants compared to full 
terms. These results suggest that moderate preterm infants' limited experience 
with low-pass filtered speech prenatally can hinder vowel change detection and 
that exposure to natural speech after birth does not seem to contribute to 
improve this capacity. These data are in line with recent evidence suggesting a 
sequential development of a hierarchical functional architecture of speech 
processing that is highly sensitive to early auditory experience.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12990
PMID: 32416634


131. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12818. doi: 10.1111/desc.12818. Epub 2019 Mar 15.

Measuring executive function skills in young children in Kenya: Associations 
with school readiness.

Willoughby MT(1), Piper B(2), Oyanga A(2), Merseth King K(3).

Author information:
(1)Education and Workforce Development, RTI International, Research Triangle 
Park, North Carolina.
(2)International Education, RTI International, Nairobi, Kenya.
(3)International Education, RTI International, Washington, District of Columbia.

Most of what is known about the association between children's executive 
function (EF) and school readiness skills is derived from research conducted in 
Western countries. We tested whether these associations were evident in a 
middle-income country context. Participants were 1,480 children, aged 4-7 years 
old, who participated in an endline assessment of the Tayari program, an early 
childhood education (ECE) model that is being delivered by the Kenyan education 
system. High rates of task completion, low rates of floor effects, and high 
rates of assessor quality ratings supported the feasibility of large-scale 
direct assessments of EF with young children. Assessor ratings of children's 
attention-related behaviors during testing were positively associated with their 
performance on EF tasks (rs = 0.12-0.27). An EF composite score was not related 
to demographic factors or to children's exposure to the Tayari program. However, 
the EF composite score was uniquely associated with performance-based measures 
of early literacy (β = 0.18, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.05, 0.31), early 
numeracy (β = 0.16, 95% CI = 0.07, 26), and social-emotional competencies 
(β = 0.12, 95% CI = 0.03, 0.20), even after adjustment for multiple covariates. 
These results are discussed with respect to the ways in which EF skills inform 
ongoing efforts to invest in ECE in low- and middle-income countries.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12818
PMID: 30779264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Dev Sci. 2020 May;23(3):e12916. doi: 10.1111/desc.12916. Epub 2019 Oct 30.

Being proven wrong elicits learning in children - but only in those with higher 
executive function skills.

Brod G(1)(2)(3), Breitwieser J(1)(2), Hasselhorn M(1)(2)(3), Bunge SA(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Individual Development and Adaptive Education of Children at Risk 
(IDeA), Frankfurt, Germany.
(2)DIPF | Leibniz Institute for Research and Information in Education, 
Frankfurt, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychology, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany.
(4)Department of Psychology & Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of 
California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.

This study investigated whether prompting children to generate predictions about 
an outcome facilitates activation of prior knowledge and improves belief 
revision. 51 children aged 9-12 were tested on two experimental tasks in which 
generating a prediction was compared to closely matched control conditions, as 
well as on a test of executive functions (EF). In Experiment 1, we showed that 
children exhibited a pupillary surprise response to events that they had 
predicted incorrectly, hypothesized to reflect the transient release of 
noradrenaline in response to cognitive conflict. However, children's surprise 
response was not associated with better belief revision, in contrast to a 
previous study involving adults. Experiment 2 revealed that, while generating 
predictions helped children activate their prior knowledge, only those with 
better inhibitory control skills learned from incorrectly predicted outcomes. 
Together, these results suggest that good inhibitory control skills are needed 
for learning through cognitive conflict. Thus, generating predictions benefits 
learning - but only among children with sufficient EF capacities to harness 
surprise for revising their beliefs.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12916
PMID: 31626721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Dev Sci. 2020 Jul;23(4):e12831. doi: 10.1111/desc.12831. Epub 2019 Apr 22.

Adaptive working memory training can reduce anxiety and depression vulnerability 
in adolescents.

Beloe P(1), Derakshan N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck University of London, London, 
UK.

Adolescents can be at heightened risk for anxiety and depression, with 
accumulating research reporting on associations between anxiety and depression 
and cognitive impairments, implicating working memory and attentional control 
deficits. Several studies now point to the promise of adaptive working memory 
training to increase attentional control in depressed and anxious participants 
and reduce anxiety and depression symptoms, but this has not been explored in a 
non-clinical adolescent population. The current study explored the effects of 
adaptive dual n-back working memory training on sub-clinical anxiety and 
depression symptomology in adolescents. Participants trained on either an online 
adaptive working memory task or non-adaptive control task for up to 20 days. 
Primary outcome measures were self-reported anxiety and depression symptomology, 
before and after intervention, and at 1-month follow-up. Self-reported 
depression (p = 0.003) and anxiety (p = 0.04) decreased after training in the 
adaptive n-back group relative to the non-adaptive control group in the 
intention-to-treat sample (n = 120). These effects were sustained at follow-up. 
Our findings constitute proof of principle evidence that working memory training 
may help reduce anxiety and depression vulnerability in a non-clinical 
adolescent population. We discuss the findings' implications for reducing risk 
of internalizing disorders in youth and the need for replication.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12831
PMID: 30927316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Dev Sci. 2020 Dec 4:e13070. doi: 10.1111/desc.13070. Online ahead of print.

Neighborhood racial demographics predict infants' neural responses to people of 
different races.

Hwang HG(1), Debnath R(2)(3), Meyer M(1)(4), Salo VC(2)(5), Fox NA(2), Woodward 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology, University of 
Maryland. College Park, MD, USA.
(3)Leibniz Institute for Neurobiology, Magdeburg, Germany.
(4)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behavior, Radboud University, 
Nijmegen, Netherlands.
(5)Department of Psychology and Human Development, Vanderbilt University. 
Nashville, TN, USA.

Early in life, greater exposure to diverse people can change the tendency to 
prefer one's own social group. For instance, infants from racially diverse 
environments show less preference for their own-race (ingroup) over other-race 
(outgroup) faces than infants from racially homogeneous environments. Yet how 
social environment changes ingroup versus outgroup demarcation in infancy 
remains unclear. A commonly held assumption is that early emerging ingroup 
preference is based on an affective process: feeling more comfortable with 
familiar ingroup than unfamiliar outgroup members. However, other processes may 
also underlie ingroup preference: Infants may attend more to ingroup than 
outgroup members and/or mirror the actions of ingroup over outgroup individuals. 
By aggregating 7- to 12-month-old infants' electroencephalography (EEG) activity 
across three studies, we disambiguate these different processes in the EEG 
oscillations of preverbal infants according to social environment. White infants 
from more racially diverse neighborhoods exhibited greater frontal theta 
oscillation (an index of top-down attention) and more mu rhythm 
desynchronization (an index of motor system activation and potentially neural 
mirroring) to racial outgroup individuals than White infants from less racially 
diverse neighborhoods. Neighborhood racial demographics did not relate to White 
infants' frontal alpha asymmetry (a measure of approach-withdrawal motivation) 
toward racial outgroup individuals. Racial minority infants showed no effects of 
neighborhood racial demographics in their neural responses to racial outgroup 
individuals. These results indicate that neural mechanisms that may underlie 
social bias and prejudices are related to neighborhood racial demographics in 
the first year of life.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13070
PMID: 33277794


135. Dev Sci. 2020 Oct 16:e13050. doi: 10.1111/desc.13050. Online ahead of print.

Dual language statistical word segmentation in infancy: Simulating a 
language-mixing bilingual environment.

Tsui ASM(1)(2), Erickson LC(3), Mallikarjunn A(4), Thiessen ED(5), Fennell 
CT(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(3)Society for Women's Health Research, Washington, DC, USA.
(4)University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA.
(5)Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Infants are sensitive to syllable co-occurrence probabilities when segmenting 
words from fluent speech. However, segmenting two languages overlapping at the 
syllabic level is challenging because the statistical cues across the languages 
are incongruent. Successful segmentation, thus, relies on infants' ability to 
separate language inputs and track the statistics of each language. Here, we 
report three experiments investigating how infants statistically segment words 
from two overlapping languages in a simulated language-mixing bilingual 
environment. In the first two experiments, we investigated whether 
9.5-month-olds can use French and English phonetic markers to segment words from 
two overlapping artificial languages produced by one individual. After showing 
that infants could segment the languages when the languages were presented in 
isolation (Experiment 1), we presented infants with two interleaved languages 
differing in phonetic cues (Experiment 2). Both monolingual and bilingual 
infants successfully segmented words from one of the two languages-the language 
heard last during familiarization. In Experiment 3, a conceptual replication, we 
replicated the findings of Experiment 2 with a different population and with 
different cues. As before, when 12-month-old monolingual infants heard two 
interleaved languages differing in English and Finnish phonetic cues, they 
learned only the last language heard during familiarization. Together, our 
findings suggest that segmenting words in a language-mixing environment is 
challenging, but infants possess a nascent ability to recruit phonetic cues to 
segment words from one of two overlapping languages in a bilingual-like 
environment. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=92pNcpxZguw.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13050
PMID: 33063938


136. Dev Sci. 2020 May;23(3):e12903. doi: 10.1111/desc.12903. Epub 2019 Oct 1.

Irrelevant-action imitation is short-term and contextual: Evidence from two 
under-studied populations.

Kline MA(1), Gervais MM(1)(2), Moya C(3), Boyd RT(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Burnaby, BC, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Anthropology, University of California Davis, Davis, CA, USA.
(4)Institute of Human Origins, School of Human Evolution and Social Change, 
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.

Across the lifespan and across populations, humans 'overimitate' causally 
unnecessary behaviors. Such irrelevant-action imitation facilitates faithful 
cultural transmission, but its immediate benefits to the imitator are 
controversial. Over short time scales, irrelevant-action imitation may bootstrap 
artifact exploration or interpersonal affiliation, and over longer time scales 
it may facilitate acquisition of either causal models or social conventions. To 
investigate these putative functions, we recruited community samples from two 
under-studied populations: Yasawa, Fiji, and Huatasani, Peru. We use a 
two-action puzzle box: first after a video demonstration, and again one month 
later. Treating age as a continuous variable, we reveal divergent developmental 
trajectories across sites. Yasawans (44 adults, M = 39.9 years, 23 women; 42 
children, M = 9.8 years, 26 girls) resemble documented patterns, with 
irrelevant-action imitation increasing across childhood and plateauing in 
adulthood. In contrast, Huatasaneños (48 adults, M = 37.6 years, 33 women; 47 
children, M = 9.3 years, 13 girls) evince a parabolic trajectory: adults at the 
site show the lowest irrelevant-action imitation of any demographic set in our 
sample. In addition, all age sets in both populations reduce their irrelevant 
actions at Time 2, but do not reduce their relevant-action imitation or goal 
attainment. Taken together, and considering the local cultural contexts, our 
results suggest that irrelevant-action imitation serves a short-term function 
and is sensitive to the social context of the demonstration.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12903
PMID: 31505090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Dev Sci. 2019 May;22(3):e12776. doi: 10.1111/desc.12776. Epub 2019 Jan 2.

Offline consolidation supersedes prior knowledge benefits in children's (but not 
adults') word learning.

James E(1), Gaskell MG(1), Henderson LM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of York, York, North Yorkshire, UK.

Prior linguistic knowledge is proposed to support the acquisition and 
consolidation of new words. Adults typically have larger vocabularies to support 
word learning than children, but the developing brain shows enhanced neural 
processes that are associated with offline memory consolidation. This study 
investigated contributions of prior knowledge to initial word acquisition and 
consolidation at different points in development, by teaching children and 
adults novel words (e.g., ballow) that varied in the number of English word-form 
"neighbours" (e.g., wallow, bellow). Memory for the novel word-forms was tested 
immediately after training, the next day and 1 week later, to assess the 
time-course of prior knowledge contributions. Children aged 7-9 years 
(Experiments 1, 3) and adults (Experiment 2) recalled words with neighbours 
better than words without neighbours when tested immediately after training. 
However, a period of offline consolidation improved overall recall and reduced 
the influence of word-form neighbours on longer term memory. These offline 
consolidation benefits were larger in children than adults, supporting theories 
that children have a greater propensity for consolidating phonologically 
distinctive language information. Local knowledge of just a single word-form 
neighbour was enough to enhance learning, and this led to the individual 
differences in word recall that were related to adults' global vocabulary 
ability. The results support the proposal that the relative contributions of 
different learning mechanisms change across the lifespan, and highlight the 
importance of testing theoretical models of word learning in the context of 
development.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12776
PMID: 30471161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12822. doi: 10.1111/desc.12822. Epub 2019 Mar 21.

Early adversity in rural India impacts the brain networks underlying visual 
working memory.

Wijeakumar S(1), Kumar A(2), Delgado Reyes LM(3), Tiwari M(2), Spencer JP(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Stirling, Stirling, UK.
(2)Community Empowerment Lab, Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow, India.
(3)School of Psychology, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK.

There is a growing need to understand the global impact of poverty on early 
brain and behavioural development, particularly with regard to key cognitive 
processes that emerge in early development. Although the impact of adversity on 
brain development can trap children in an intergenerational cycle of poverty, 
the massive potential for brain plasticity is also a source of hope: reliable, 
accessible, culturally agnostic methods to assess early brain development in low 
resource settings might be used to measure the impact of early adversity, 
identify infants for timely intervention and guide the development and monitor 
the effectiveness of early interventions. Visual working memory (VWM) is an 
early marker of cognitive capacity that has been assessed reliably in early 
infancy and is predictive of later academic achievement in Western countries. 
Here, we localized the functional brain networks that underlie VWM in early 
development in rural India using a portable neuroimaging system, and we assessed 
the impact of adversity on these brain networks. We recorded functional brain 
activity as young children aged 4-48 months performed a VWM task. Brain imaging 
results revealed localized activation in the frontal cortex, replicating 
findings from a Midwestern US sample. Critically, children from families with 
low maternal education and income showed weaker brain activity and poorer 
distractor suppression in canonical working memory areas in the left frontal 
cortex. Implications of this work are far-reaching: it is now cost-effective to 
localize functional brain networks in early development in low-resource 
settings, paving the way for novel intervention and assessment methods.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12822
PMCID: PMC6767418
PMID: 30803122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.


139. Dev Sci. 2020 May;23(3):e12904. doi: 10.1111/desc.12904. Epub 2019 Oct 7.

Knowing who knows: Metacognitive and causal learning abilities guide infants' 
selective social learning.

Kuzyk O(1), Grossman S(1), Poulin-Dubois D(1).

Author information:
(1)Concordia University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Given the widespread interest in the development of children's selective social 
learning, there is mounting evidence suggesting that infants prefer to learn 
from competent informants (Poulin-Dubois & Brosseau-Liard, Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 2016, 25). However, little research has been dedicated to 
understanding how this selectivity develops. The present study investigated 
whether causal learning and precursor metacognitive abilities govern 
discriminant learning in a classic word-learning paradigm. Infants were exposed 
to a speaker who accurately (reliable condition) or inaccurately (unreliable 
condition) labeled familiar objects and were subsequently tested on their 
ability to learn a novel word from the informant. The predictive power of causal 
learning skills and precursor metacognition (as measured through decision 
confidence) on infants' word learning was examined across both reliable and 
unreliable conditions. Results suggest that infants are more inclined to accept 
an unreliable speaker's testimony on a word learning task when they also lack 
confidence in their own knowledge on a task measuring their metacognitive 
ability. Additionally, when uncertain, infants draw on causal learning abilities 
to better learn the association between a label and a novel toy. This study is 
the first to shed light on the role of causal learning and precursor 
metacognitive judgments in infants' abilities to engage in selective trust.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12904
PMID: 31519037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Dev Sci. 2020 Jan;23(1):e12840. doi: 10.1111/desc.12840. Epub 2019 May 10.

Children can optimally integrate multisensory information after a short 
action-like mini game training.

Nava E(1)(2), Föcker J(3), Gori M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Milan-Bicocca, Milan, Italy.
(2)NeuroMi, Milan Center for Neuroscience, Milan, Italy.
(3)College of Social Science, University of Lincoln, Lincoln, UK.
(4)Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genoa, Italy.

Combining information across different sensory modalities is of critical 
importance for the animal's survival and a core feature of human's everyday 
life. In adulthood, sensory information is often integrated in a statistically 
optimal fashion, so that the combined estimates of two or more senses are more 
reliable than the best single one. Several studies have shown that young 
children use one sense to calibrate the others, which results in unisensory 
dominance and undermines their optimal multisensory integration abilities. In 
this study we trained children aged 4-5 years with action-like mini games, to 
determine whether it could improve their multisensory as well as their 
visuo-spatial skills. Multisensory integration abilities were assessed using a 
visuo-haptic size discrimination task, while visuo-spatial attention skills were 
investigated using a multiple object tracking task (MOT). We found that 2-weeks 
training were sufficient to observe both optimal multisensory integration and 
visuo-spatial enhancements selectively in the group trained with action-like 
mini games. This plastic change persisted up to 3 months, as assessed in a 
follow-up. Our novel findings reveal that abilities that are commonly known to 
emerge in late childhood can be promoted in younger children through action-like 
mini games and have long-lasting effects. Our data have clinical implications, 
in that they suggest that specific trainings could potentially help children 
with multisensory integration deficits.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12840
PMID: 31021495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Dev Sci. 2020 Mar;23(2):e12884. doi: 10.1111/desc.12884. Epub 2019 Jul 26.

The relation between subitizable symbolic and non-symbolic number processing 
over the kindergarten school year.

Hutchison JE(1), Ansari D(2), Zheng S(3), De Jesus S(3), Lyons IM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology and Brain & Mind Institute, University of Western 
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Research and Development, Toronto District School Board, North York, Ontario, 
Canada.

A long-standing debate in the field of numerical cognition concerns the degree 
to which symbolic and non-symbolic processing are related over the course of 
development. Of particular interest is the possibility that this link depends on 
the range of quantities in question. Behavioral and neuroimaging research with 
adults suggests that symbolic and non-symbolic quantities may be processed more 
similarly within, relative to outside of, the subitizing range. However, it 
remains unclear whether this unique link exists in young children at the outset 
of formal education. Further, no study has yet taken numerical size into account 
when investigating the longitudinal influence of these skills. To address these 
questions, we investigated the relation between symbolic and non-symbolic 
processing inside versus outside the subitizing range, both cross-sectionally 
and longitudinally, in 540 kindergarteners. Cross-sectionally, we found a 
consistently stronger relation between symbolic and non-symbolic number 
processing within versus outside the subitizing range at both the beginning and 
end of kindergarten. We also show evidence for a bidirectional relation over the 
course of kindergarten between formats within the subitizing range, and a 
unidirectional relation (symbolic → non-symbolic) for quantities outside of the 
subitizing range. These findings extend current theories on symbolic and 
non-symbolic magnitude development by suggesting that non-symbolic processing 
may in fact play a role in the development of symbolic number abilities, but 
that this influence may be limited to quantities within the subitizing range.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12884
PMID: 31271687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Dev Sci. 2019 Jul;22(4):e12823. doi: 10.1111/desc.12823. Epub 2019 Apr 2.

Development of approximate number sense across the elementary school years: A 
cross-cultural longitudinal study.

Tikhomirova T(1), Kuzmina Y(1), Lysenkova I(2), Malykh S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Psychological Institute of Russian Academy of 
Education, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia.
(2)Department of Psychology, Kyrgyz-Russian Slavic University, Bishkek, 
Kyrgyzstan.

In recent years, there has been growing interest among researchers in exploring 
approximate number sense (ANS)-the ability to estimate and discriminate 
quantities without the use of symbols. Despite the growing number of studies on 
ANS, there have been no cross-cultural longitudinal studies to estimate both the 
development of ANS and the cross-cultural differences in ANS growth 
trajectories. In this study, we aimed to estimate the developmental trajectories 
of ANS from the beginning of formal education to the end of elementary school in 
two countries, Russia and Kyrgyzstan, which have similar organization of their 
educational systems but differences in socioeconomic status (SES) and in the 
results of large-scale educational assessments. To assess the developmental 
trajectories of ANS, we used a four-wave longitudinal study with 416 
participants from two countries and applied the mixed effect growth approach and 
the latent class growth approach. Our analysis revealed that the rate of growth 
in ANS accuracy was higher for the Russian sample than for the Kyrgyz sample and 
that this difference remained significant even after controlling for fluid 
intelligence. We identified two latent classes of growth trajectories: the first 
class had a significant growth in ANS, whereas the second class had no growth. 
Comparing the distribution of latent classes within the two countries revealed 
that there was a significantly larger proportion of schoolchildren from the 
second class in Kyrgyzstan than in Russia.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12823
PMID: 30811762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Dev Sci. 2020 Jan;23(1):e12865. doi: 10.1111/desc.12865. Epub 2019 Jun 21.

How bilingual experience and executive control influence development in language 
control among bilingual children.

Kubota M(1), Chevalier N(1), Sorace A(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Philosophy, Psychology, and Language Sciences, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

This longitudinal study investigates whether the development in executive 
control and bilingual experience predicts change in language control in 
bilingual children. Children were tested twice over the course of 1 year, using 
the language-switching paradigm and the Simon task. The participants were 
Japanese-English bilingual "returnee" children (ages 7-13), who returned to 
their first language (L1) environment after spending some years in a second 
language (L2) dominant environment. Testing these children upon their return to 
the L1 environment allowed us to disentangle the effect of age from bilingual 
experience, as they experienced an increase in age but a decrease in L2 exposure 
over time. Children who had less L2 exposure showed smaller improvement in 
baseline performance when naming pictures in English (i.e., when English was 
relevant across all trials). Moreover, development in trials where children had 
to switch between languages were modulated by development in executive control. 
That is, children who increased their performance in the English mixed 
repetition trials also performed better on the executive control task over time. 
Thus, development in executive control modulated change in language control 
among bilingual children, suggesting a positive relationship between language 
control and executive control in children's development.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12865
PMID: 31127670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Dev Sci. 2019 Jul;22(4):e12781. doi: 10.1111/desc.12781. Epub 2019 Jan 2.

How many fingers am I holding up? The answer depends on children's language 
background.

Nicoladis E(1), Marentette P(2), Pika S(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
(2)University of Alberta-Augustana, Camrose, Alberta, Canada.
(3)University of Osnabrück, Osnabrück, Germany.

Monolingual English-speaking preschool children tend to process number gestures 
as unanalyzed wholes rather than use the one-to-one (finger-to-quantity) 
correspondence. By school age, however, children can use the one-to-one 
correspondence. The purpose of the present studies was to test whether children 
learn one-to-one correspondence through exposure to a variety of finger 
configurations to convey a single quantity. In Study 1, we compared children 
with exposure to multiple one-to-one configurations, that is, French-English and 
German-English bilingual children, to English monolingual children who see 
consistent representations. As predicted, the bilingual children performed 
better in interpreting unconventional number gestures. In Study 2, we compared 
Chinese-English bilingual children who knew arbitrary one-handed Chinese numbers 
gestures for quantities 6-10 to Chinese-English bilingual children who did not 
know these gestures, as well as to monolingual English speakers. Chinese-English 
bilinguals who knew the arbitrary gestures were more likely to interpret 
unconventional gestures arbitrarily (i.e., influenced by the written and/or 
Chinese gesture forms). These children did not differ from English monolinguals 
in the interpretation of unconventional gestures. These results are consistent 
with the argument that children can become sensitive to the one-to-one 
correspondence in number gestures with exposure to multiple configurations for 
the same quantity.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12781
PMID: 30516316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Dev Sci. 2019 Nov;22(6):e12824. doi: 10.1111/desc.12824. Epub 2019 Apr 2.

Attention and executive functioning in infancy: Links to childhood executive 
function and reading achievement.

Blankenship TL(1), Slough MA(2), Calkins SD(3), Deater-Deckard K(4), Kim-Spoon 
J(2), Bell MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Boston University, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(2)Department of Psychology, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia.
(3)Department of Human Development and Family Studies, University of North 
Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, North Carolina.
(4)Department of Psychological and Brain Science, University of Massachusetts at 
Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts.

This study provides the first analyses connecting individual differences in 
infant attention to reading achievement through the development of executive 
functioning (EF) in infancy and early childhood. Five-month-old infants observed 
a video, and peak look duration and shift rate were video coded and assessed. At 
10 months, as well as 3, 4, and 6 years, children completed age-appropriate EF 
tasks (A-not-B task, hand game, forward digit span, backwards digit span, and 
number Stroop). Children also completed a standardized reading assessment and a 
measure of verbal intelligence (IQ) at age 6. Path analyses on 157 participants 
showed that infant attention had a direct statistical predictive effect on EF at 
10 months, with EF showing a continuous pattern of development from 10 months to 
6 years. EF and verbal IQ at 6 years had a direct effect on reading achievement. 
Furthermore, EF at all time points mediated the relation between 5-month 
attention and reading achievement. These findings may inform reading 
interventions by suggesting earlier intervention time points and specific 
cognitive processes (i.e. 5-month attention).

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12824
PMCID: PMC6722030
PMID: 30828908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Dev Sci. 2019 Nov;22(6):e12847. doi: 10.1111/desc.12847. Epub 2019 Jul 2.

Comparing statistical learning across perceptual modalities in infancy: An 
investigation of underlying learning mechanism(s).

Emberson LL(1), Misyak JB(2), Schwade JA(3), Christiansen MH(3), Goldstein 
MH(3).

Author information:
(1)Psychology Department, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey.
(2)Behavioural Science Group, Warwick Business School, University of Warwick, 
Coventry, UK.
(3)Psychology Department, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York.

Statistical learning (SL), sensitivity to probabilistic regularities in sensory 
input, has been widely implicated in cognitive and perceptual development. 
Little is known, however, about the underlying mechanisms of SL and whether they 
undergo developmental change. One way to approach these questions is to compare 
SL across perceptual modalities. While a decade of research has compared 
auditory and visual SL in adults, we present the first direct comparison of 
visual and auditory SL in infants (8-10 months). Learning was evidenced in both 
perceptual modalities but with opposite directions of preference: Infants in the 
auditory condition displayed a novelty preference, while infants in the visual 
condition showed a familiarity preference. Interpreting these results within the 
Hunter and Ames model (1988), where familiarity preferences reflect a weaker 
stage of encoding than novelty preferences, we conclude that there is weaker 
learning in the visual modality than the auditory modality for this age. In 
addition, we found evidence of different developmental trajectories across 
modalities: Auditory SL increased while visual SL did not change for this age 
range. The results suggest that SL is not an abstract, amodal ability; for the 
types of stimuli and statistics tested, we find that auditory SL precedes the 
development of visual SL and is consistent with recent work comparing SL across 
modalities in older children.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12847
PMCID: PMC7294581
PMID: 31077516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Dev Sci. 2019 Mar;22(2):e12751. doi: 10.1111/desc.12751. Epub 2018 Oct 10.

Fourteen-month-old infants track the language comprehension of communicative 
partners.

Forgács B(1)(2)(3)(4), Parise E(5)(6), Csibra G(6)(7), Gergely G(6), Jacquey 
L(1)(2), Gervain J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire Psychologie de la Perception (LPP), Université Paris Descartes, 
Paris, France.
(2)Laboratoire Psychologie de la Perception (LPP), CNRS, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Cognitive Psychology, Eötvös Loránd University (ELTE), 
Budapest, Hungary.
(4)Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary.
(5)Department of Psychology, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK.
(6)Cognitive Development Center (CDC), Department of Cognitive Science, Central 
European University (CEU), Budapest, Hungary.
(7)Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London, London, 
UK.

Erratum in
    Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e13014.

Infants employ sophisticated mechanisms to acquire their first language, 
including some that rely on taking the perspective of adults as speakers or 
listeners. When do infants first show awareness of what other people understand? 
We tested 14-month-old infants in two experiments measuring event-related 
potentials. In Experiment 1, we established that infants produce the N400 
effect, a brain signature of semantic violations, in a live object naming 
paradigm in the presence of an adult observer. In Experiment 2, we induced false 
beliefs about the labeled objects in the adult observer to test whether infants 
keep track of the other person's comprehension. The results revealed that 
infants reacted to the semantic incongruity heard by the other as if they 
encountered it themselves: they exhibited an N400-like response, even though 
labels were congruous from their perspective. This finding demonstrates that 
infants track the linguistic understanding of social partners.

© 2018 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12751
PMCID: PMC6492012
PMID: 30184313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
declare.


148. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12936. doi: 10.1111/desc.12936. Epub 2020 Feb 12.

The role of midfrontal theta oscillations across the development of cognitive 
control in preschoolers and school-age children.

Adam N(1)(2), Blaye A(2)(3), Gulbinaite R(4)(5), Delorme A(1)(2)(6), Farrer 
C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre de recherche Cerveau et Cognition, Université de Toulouse, Toulouse, 
France.
(2)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris, France.
(3)Laboratoire de Psychologie Cognitive, Université Aix-Marseille, Marseille, 
France.
(4)Centre de Recherche en Neurosciences, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(5)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U1028, Lyon, 
France.
(6)Swartz Center for Computational Neuroscience, University of California, San 
Diego, CA, USA.

The development of cognitive control enables children to better resist acting 
based on distracting information that interferes with the current action. 
Cognitive control improvement serves different functions that differ in part by 
the type of interference to resolve. Indeed, resisting to interference at the 
task-set level or at the response-preparation level is, respectively, associated 
with cognitive flexibility and inhibition. It is, however, unknown whether the 
same neural mechanism underlies these two functions across development. Studies 
in adults have revealed the contribution of midfrontal theta (MFT) oscillations 
in interference resolution. This study investigated whether MFT is involved in 
the resolution of different types of interference in two age groups identified 
as corresponding to different latent structures of executive functions. 
Preschool (4-6 years) and school children (6-8 years) were tested with a task 
involving interference at the response level and/or the task-set level while 
(electroencephalogram) EEG was recorded. Behaviorally, response time and 
accuracy were affected by task-set. Both age groups were less accurate when the 
interference occurred at the task-set level and only the younger group showed 
decreased accuracy when interference was presented at the response-preparation 
level. Furthermore, MFT power was increased, relative to the baseline, during 
the resolution of both types of interference and in both age groups. These 
findings suggest that MFT is involved in immature cognitive control (i.e., 
preschool and school-ages), by orchestrating its different cognitive processes, 
irrespective of the interference to resolve and of the level of cognitive 
control development (i.e., the degree of differentiation of executive 
functions).

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12936
PMID: 31894624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Dev Sci. 2020 Mar;23(2):e12885. doi: 10.1111/desc.12885. Epub 2019 Jul 23.

Atypical shape bias and categorization in autism: Evidence from children and 
computational simulations.

Tovar ÁE(1), Rodríguez-Granados A(1), Arias-Trejo N(1).

Author information:
(1)Facultad de Psicología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México City, 
México.

The shape bias, a preference for mapping new word labels onto the shape rather 
than the color or texture of referents, has been postulated as a word-learning 
mechanism. Previous research has shown deficits in the shape bias in children 
with autism even though they acquire sizeable lexicons. While previous 
explanations have suggested the atypical use of color for label extension in 
individuals with autism, we hypothesize an atypical mapping of novel labels to 
novel objects, regardless of the physical properties of the objects. In 
Experiment 1, we demonstrate this phenomenon in some individuals with autism, 
but the novelty of objects only partially explains their lack of shape bias. In 
a second experiment, we present a computational model that provides a 
developmental account of the shape bias in typically developing children and in 
those with autism. This model is based on theories of neurological dysfunctions 
in autism, and it integrates theoretical and empirical findings in the 
literature of categorization, word learning, and the shape bias. The model 
replicates the pattern of results of our first experiment and shows how 
individuals with autism are more likely to categorize experimental objects 
together on the basis of their novelty. It also provides insights into possible 
mechanisms by which children with autism learn new words, and why their word 
referents may be idiosyncratic. Our model highlights a developmental approach to 
autism that emphasizes deficient representations of categories underlying an 
impaired shape bias.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12885
PMID: 31271684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Dev Sci. 2020 Mar;23(2):e12881. doi: 10.1111/desc.12881. Epub 2019 Jul 4.

Actions speak louder than words: Differences in memory flexibility between 
monolingual and bilingual 18-month-olds.

Barr R(1), Rusnak SN(1), Brito NH(2), Nugent C(1).

Author information:
(1)Georgetown University, Washington, District of Columbia.
(2)New York University, New York, New York.

Bilingual infants from 6- to 24-months of age are more likely to generalize, 
flexibly reproducing actions on novel objects significantly more often than 
age-matched monolingual infants are. In the current study, we examine whether 
the addition of novel verbal labels enhances memory generalization in a 
perceptually complex imitation task. We hypothesized that labels would provide 
an additional retrieval cue and aid memory generalization for bilingual infants. 
Specifically, we hypothesized that bilinguals might be more likely than 
monolinguals to map multiple perceptual features onto a novel label and 
therefore show enhanced generalization. Eighty-seven 18-month-old monolingual 
and bilingual infants were randomly assigned to one of two experimental 
conditions or a baseline control condition. In the experimental conditions, 
either no label or a novel label was added during demonstration and again at the 
beginning of the test session. After a 24-hr delay, infants were tested with the 
same stimulus set to test cued recall and with a perceptually different but 
functionally equivalent stimulus set to test memory generalization. Bilinguals 
performed significantly above baseline on both cued recall and memory 
generalization in both experimental conditions, whereas monolinguals performed 
significantly above baseline only on cued recall in both experimental 
conditions. These findings show a difference between monolinguals and bilinguals 
in memory generalization and suggest that generalization differences between 
groups may arise from visual perceptual processing rather than linguistic 
processing. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at 
https://youtu.be/yXB4pM3fF2k.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12881
PMID: 31206995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Dev Sci. 2019 Jul;22(4):e12792. doi: 10.1111/desc.12792. Epub 2019 Jan 18.

A parent intervention with a growth mindset approach improves children's early 
gesture and vocabulary development.

Rowe ML(1), Leech KA(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Education, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Socioeconomic disparities in children's early vocabulary skills can be traced 
back to disparities in gesture use at age one and are due, in part, to the 
quantity and quality of communication children are exposed to by parents. 
Further, parents' mindsets about intelligence contribute to their interactions 
with their children. We implemented a parent gesture intervention with a growth 
mindset component with 47 parents of 10-month-olds to determine whether this 
approach would increase parents' use of the pointing gesture, infants' use of 
pointing, and child vocabulary growth. The intervention had an effect on parent 
gesture such that by child age 12-months, parents who received the intervention 
increased in their pointing more than parents in the control condition. 
Importantly, the intervention also had a significant effect on child gesture use 
with parents. There was no main effect of the intervention on child vocabulary. 
Further, the effect of the intervention on pointing was stronger for parents who 
endorsed fixed mindsets at baseline, and had an added benefit of increased 
vocabulary growth from 10-18 months for children of those parents who endorsed 
fixed mindsets. Incorporating growth mindset approaches into parenting 
interventions is encouraged.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12792
PMCID: PMC7041843
PMID: 30570813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Dev Sci. 2020 Oct 27:e13057. doi: 10.1111/desc.13057. Online ahead of print.

Relations between parent-child interaction and children's engagement and 
learning at a museum exhibit about electric circuits.

Sobel DM(1), Letourneau SM(2), Legare CH(3), Callanan M(4).

Author information:
(1)Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.
(2)New York Hall of Science, New York, NY, USA.
(3)The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA.
(4)University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USA.

Play is critical for children's learning, but there is significant disagreement 
over whether and how parents should guide children's play. The objective of the 
current study was to examine how parent-child interaction affected children's 
engagement and problem-solving behaviors when challenged with similar tasks. 
Parents and 4- to 7-year-old children in the U.S. (N = 111 dyads) played 
together at an interactive electric circuit exhibit in a children's museum. We 
examined how parents and children set and accomplished goals while playing with 
the exhibit materials. Children then participated in a set of challenges that 
involved completing increasingly difficult circuits. Children whose parents set 
goals for their interactions showed less engagement with the challenge task 
(choosing to attempt fewer challenges), and children whose parents were more 
active in completing the circuits while families played with the exhibit 
subsequently completed fewer challenges on their own. We discuss these results 
in light of broader findings on the role of parent-child interaction in museum 
settings.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13057
PMID: 33108708


153. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12935. doi: 10.1111/desc.12935. Epub 2020 Jan 9.

Individual differences in motor development during early childhood: An MEG 
study.

Johnson B(1), Jobst C(2), Al-Loos R(2), He W(1), Cheyne D(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Science, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia.
(2)Program in Neurosciences and Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children 
Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Medical Imaging, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

In a previous study, we reported the first measurements of pre-movement and 
sensorimotor cortex activity in preschool age children (ages 3-5 years) using a 
customized pediatric magnetoencephalographic system. Movement-related activity 
in the sensorimotor cortex differed from that typically observed in adults, 
suggesting that maturation of cortical motor networks was still incomplete by 
late preschool age. Here we compare these earlier results to a group of school 
age children (ages 6-8 years) including seven children from the original study 
measured again two years later, and a group of adults (mean age 31.1 years) 
performing the same task. Differences in movement-related brain activity were 
observed both longitudinally within children in which repeated measurements were 
made, and cross-sectionally between preschool age children, school age children, 
and adults. Movement-related mu (8-12 Hz) and beta (15-30 Hz) oscillations 
demonstrated linear increases in amplitude and mean frequency with age. In 
contrast, movement-evoked gamma synchronization demonstrated a step-like 
transition from low (30-50 Hz) to high (70-90 Hz) narrow-band oscillations, and 
this occurred at different ages in different children. Notably, pre-movement 
activity ('readiness fields') observed in adults was absent in even the oldest 
children. These are the first direct observations of brain activity accompanying 
motor responses throughout early childhood, confirming that maturation of this 
activity is still incomplete by mid-childhood. In addition, individual children 
demonstrated markedly different developmental trajectories in movement-related 
brain activity, suggesting that individual differences need to be taken into 
account when studying motor development across age groups.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12935
PMID: 31869490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12680. doi: 10.1111/desc.12680. Epub 2018 Jun 19.

Neural signatures of co-occurring reading and mathematical difficulties.

Skeide MA(1)(2), Evans TM(1), Mei EZ(1), Abrams DA(1), Menon V(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, 
Stanford, California, USA.
(2)Department of Neuropsychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and 
Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University, 
Stanford, California, USA.
(4)Stanford Neuroscience Institute, Stanford, California, USA.

Impaired abilities in multiple domains is common in children with learning 
difficulties. Co-occurrence of low reading and mathematical abilities (LRLM) 
appears in almost every second child with learning difficulties. However, little 
is known regarding the neural bases of this combination. Leveraging a unique and 
tightly controlled sample including children with LRLM, isolated low reading 
ability (LR), and isolated low mathematical ability (LM), we uncover a distinct 
neural signature in children with co-occurring low reading and mathematical 
abilities differentiable from LR and LM. Specifically, we show that LRLM is 
neuroanatomically distinct from both LR and LM based on reduced cortical folding 
of the right parahippocampal gyrus, a medial temporal lobe region implicated in 
visual associative learning. LRLM children were further distinguished from LR 
and LM by patterns of intrinsic functional connectivity between parahippocampal 
gyrus and brain circuitry underlying reading and numerical quantity processing. 
Our results critically inform cognitive and neural models of LRLM by implicating 
aberrations in both domain-specific and domain-general brain regions involved in 
reading and mathematics. More generally, our results provide the first evidence 
for distinct multimodal neural signatures associated with LRLM, and suggest that 
this population displays an independent phenotype of learning difficulty that 
cannot be explained simply as a combination of isolated low reading and 
mathematical abilities.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12680
PMCID: PMC6347422
PMID: 29920856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Dev Sci. 2019 May;22(3):e12758. doi: 10.1111/desc.12758. Epub 2018 Oct 16.

Neural correlates of facial emotion processing in infancy.

Xie W(1)(2), McCormick SA(3), Westerlund A(1), Bowman LC(4), Nelson CA(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratories of Cognitive Neuroscience, Division of Developmental Medicine, 
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Massachusetts, 
Amherst, Massachusetts.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of California, Davis, California.
(5)Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

In the present study we examined the neural correlates of facial emotion 
processing in the first year of life using ERP measures and cortical source 
analysis. EEG data were collected cross-sectionally from 5- (N = 49), 7- 
(N = 50), and 12-month-old (N = 51) infants while they were viewing images of 
angry, fearful, and happy faces. The N290 component was found to be larger in 
amplitude in response to fearful and happy than angry faces in all posterior 
clusters and showed largest response to fear than the other two emotions only 
over the right occipital area. The P400 and Nc components were found to be 
larger in amplitude in response to angry than happy and fearful faces over 
central and frontal scalp. Cortical source analysis of the N290 component 
revealed greater cortical activation in the right fusiform face area in response 
to fearful faces. This effect started to emerge at 5 months and became well 
established at 7 months, but it disappeared at 12 months. The P400 and Nc 
components were primarily localized to the PCC/Precuneus where heightened 
responses to angry faces were observed. The current results suggest the 
detection of a fearful face in infants' brain can happen shortly (~200-290 ms) 
after the stimulus onset, and this process may rely on the face network and 
develop substantially between 5 to 7 months of age. The current findings also 
suggest the differential processing of angry faces occurred later in the P400/Nc 
time window, which recruits the PCC/Precuneus and is associated with the 
allocation of infants' attention.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12758
PMCID: PMC6443490
PMID: 30276933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest The authors have approved 
the manuscript and agreed with its submission. The authors declare no conflict 
of interest.


156. Dev Sci. 2019 Nov;22(6):e12811. doi: 10.1111/desc.12811. Epub 2019 Mar 6.

The neural correlates of orienting to walking direction in 6-month-old infants: 
An ERP study.

Lunghi M(1), Piccardi ES(2), Richards JE(3), Simion F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Social Psychology, University of Padova, 
Italy.
(2)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Birkbeck University of London, 
London, UK.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South 
Carolina.

The ability to detect social signals represents a first step to enter our social 
world. Behavioral evidence has demonstrated that 6-month-old infants are able to 
orient their attention toward the position indicated by walking direction, 
showing faster orienting responses toward stimuli cued by the direction of 
motion than toward uncued stimuli. The present study investigated the neural 
mechanisms underpinning this attentional priming effect by using a spatial 
cueing paradigm and recording EEG (Geodesic System 128 channels) from 
6-month-old infants. Infants were presented with a central point-light walker 
followed by a single peripheral target. The target appeared randomly at a 
position either congruent or incongruent with the walking direction of the cue. 
We examined infants' target-locked event-related potential (ERP) responses and 
we used cortical source analysis to explore which brain regions gave rise to the 
ERP responses. The P1 component and saccade latencies toward the peripheral 
target were modulated by the congruency between the walking direction of the cue 
and the position of the target. Infants' saccade latencies were faster in 
response to targets appearing at congruent spatial locations. The P1 component 
was larger in response to congruent than to incongruent targets and a similar 
congruency effect was found with cortical source analysis in the parahippocampal 
gyrus and the anterior fusiform gyrus. Overall, these findings suggest that a 
type of biological motion like the one of a vertebrate walking on the legs can 
trigger covert orienting of attention in 6-month-old infants, enabling 
enhancement of neural activity related to visual processing of potentially 
relevant information as well as a facilitation of oculomotor responses to 
stimuli appearing at the attended location.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12811
PMCID: PMC6689458
PMID: 30740853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Dev Sci. 2020 May;23(3):e12907. doi: 10.1111/desc.12907. Epub 2019 Oct 21.

The link between maternal and child verbal abilities: An indirect effect through 
maternal responsiveness.

Prime H(1)(2), Wade M(3), Gonzalez A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Neurosciences, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(2)Offord Centre for Child Studies, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Applied Psychology and Human Development, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Language abilities in early childhood show stability over time and play an 
important role in the development of other cognitive processes. Identifying 
modifiable environmental risk factors is important to informing prevention and 
early intervention efforts. Maternal verbal ability has been previously linked 
to child verbal ability. The current study examined whether maternal and child 
verbal abilities were linked indirectly through early childhood maternal 
responsiveness. Data come from a longitudinal birth cohort study. Participants 
included 133 mothers and their children recruited from maternity wards shortly 
after birth. Maternal verbal ability was measured using the Vocabulary subtest 
from the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence, Second Edition (child age 
8 months). Child verbal ability was assessed using the Peabody Picture 
Vocabulary Test (36 months). A latent maternal responsiveness variable was 
estimated using three developmentally sensitive indicators; one during infancy 
(child age 8 months) and two when children were 36 months. Results of a 
structural equation model indicated a significant indirect effect from maternal 
verbal abilities to child verbal abilities through maternal responsiveness. This 
indirect path was significant even after inclusion of another indirect path from 
maternal executive functioning to child verbal ability through maternal 
responsiveness (which was not significant). Future studies will benefit from 
experimental, genetically sensitive and/or cross-lagged designs to allow for 
conclusions related to directionality and causality. This body of research has 
implications for the study of the intergenerational transmission of verbal 
abilities and associated skills, behaviours and adaptive outcomes.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12907
PMID: 31571333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Dev Sci. 2020 Mar;23(2):e12876. doi: 10.1111/desc.12876. Epub 2019 Jun 28.

Neural correlates of infant action processing relate to theory of mind in early 
childhood.

Filippi C(1), Choi YB(2), Fox NA(3), Woodward AL(4).

Author information:
(1)Section on Development and Affective Neuroscience, National Institute of 
Mental Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(2)Center for Autism and the Developing Brain, Weill Cornell Medicine, White 
Plains, New York.
(3)Department of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology, University of 
Maryland, College Park, Maryland.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.

The mechanisms that support infant action processing are thought to be involved 
in the development of later social cognition. While a growing body of research 
demonstrates longitudinal links between action processing and explicit theory of 
mind (TOM), it remains unclear why this link emerges in some measures of action 
encoding and not others. In this paper, we recruit neural measures as a unique 
lens into which aspects of human infant action processing (i.e., action encoding 
and action execution; age 7 months) are related to preschool TOM (age 3 years; 
n = 31). We test whether individual differences in recruiting the sensorimotor 
system or attention processes during action encoding predict individual 
differences in TOM. Results indicate that reduced occipital alpha during action 
encoding predicts TOM at age 3. This finding converges with behavioral work and 
suggests that attentional processes involved in action encoding may support TOM. 
We also test whether neural processing during action execution draws on the 
proto-substrates of effortful control (EC). Results indicate that frontal alpha 
oscillatory activity during action execution predicted EC at age 3-providing 
strong novel evidence that infant brain activity is longitudinally linked to EC. 
Further, we demonstrate that EC mediates the link between the frontal alpha 
response and TOM. This indirect effect is specific in terms of direction, neural 
response, and behavior. Together, these findings converge with behavioral 
research and demonstrate that domain general processes show strong links to 
early infant action processing and TOM.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12876
PMCID: PMC7227764
PMID: 31162859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors listed above have no conflicts of 
interest to declare.


159. Dev Sci. 2020 Mar;23(2):e12902. doi: 10.1111/desc.12902. Epub 2019 Oct 1.

Face detection in 2- to 6-month-old infants is influenced by gaze direction and 
species.

Simpson EA(1), Maylott SE(1), Mitsven SG(1), Zeng G(1), Jakobsen KV(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, James Madison University, Harrisonburg, VA, USA.

Humans detect faces efficiently from a young age. Face detection is critical for 
infants to identify and learn from relevant social stimuli in their 
environments. Faces with eye contact are an especially salient stimulus, and 
attention to the eyes in infancy is linked to the emergence of later sociality. 
Despite the importance of both of these early social skills-attending to faces 
and attending to the eyes-surprisingly little is known about how they interact. 
We used eye tracking to explore whether eye contact influences infants' face 
detection. Longitudinally, we examined 2-, 4-, and 6-month-olds' (N = 65) visual 
scanning of complex image arrays with human and animal faces varying in eye 
contact and head orientation. Across all ages, infants displayed superior 
detection of faces with eye contact; however, this effect varied as a function 
of species and head orientation. Infants were more attentive to human than 
animal faces and were more sensitive to eye and head orientation for human faces 
compared to animal faces. Unexpectedly, human faces with both averted heads and 
eyes received the most attention. This pattern may reflect the early emergence 
of gaze following-the ability to look where another individual looks-which 
begins to develop around this age. Infants may be especially interested in 
averted gaze faces, providing early scaffolding for joint attention. This study 
represents the first investigation to document infants' attention patterns to 
faces systematically varying in their attentional states. Together, these 
findings suggest that infants develop early, specialized functional conspecific 
face detection.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12902
PMID: 31505079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Dev Sci. 2020 Mar;23(2):e12886. doi: 10.1111/desc.12886. Epub 2019 Jul 25.

Perceiving gaze from head and eye rotations: An integrative challenge for 
children and adults.

Mihalache D(1), Feng H(2), Askari F(2), Sokol-Hessner P(1), Moody EJ(3), Mahoor 
MH(2), Sweeny TD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Denver, Denver, Colorado.
(2)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Denver, 
Denver, Colorado.
(3)Wyoming Institute for Disabilities, University of Wyoming, Laramie, Wyoming.

Gaze is an emergent visual feature. A person's gaze direction is perceived not 
just based on the rotation of their eyes, but also their head. At least among 
adults, this integrative process appears to be flexible such that one feature 
can be weighted more heavily than the other depending on the circumstances. Yet 
it is unclear how this weighting might vary across individuals or across 
development. When children engage emergent gaze, do they prioritize cues from 
the head and eyes similarly to adults? Is the perception of gaze among 
individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) emergent, or is it reliant on a 
single feature? Sixty adults (M = 29.86 years-of-age), thirty-seven typically 
developing children and adolescents (M = 9.3 years-of-age; range = 7-15), and 
eighteen children with ASD (M = 9.72 years-of-age; range = 7-15) viewed faces 
with leftward, rightward, or direct head rotations in conjunction with leftward 
or rightward pupil rotations, and then indicated whether the face was looking 
leftward or rightward. All individuals, across development and ASD status, used 
head rotation to infer gaze direction, albeit with some individual differences. 
However, the use of pupil rotation was heavily dependent on age. Finally, 
children with ASD used pupil rotation significantly less than typically 
developing (TD) children when inferring gaze direction, even after accounting 
for age. Our approach provides a novel framework for understanding individual 
and group differences in gaze as it is actually perceived-as an emergent 
feature. Furthermore, this study begins to address an important gap in ASD 
literature, taking the first look at emergent gaze perception in this 
population.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12886
PMCID: PMC6942234
PMID: 31271685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12855. doi: 10.1111/desc.12855. Epub 2019 May 30.

Chaos, danger, and maternal parenting in families: Links with adolescent 
adjustment in low- and middle-income countries.

Deater-Deckard K(1), Godwin J(2), Lansford JE(2), Tirado LMU(3), 
Yotanyamaneewong S(4), Alampay LP(5), Al-Hassan SM(6)(7), Bacchini D(8), 
Bornstein MH(9)(10), Chang L(11), Di Giunta L(12), Dodge KA(2), Oburu P(13), 
Pastorelli C(12), Skinner AT(2), Sorbring E(14), Steinberg L(15)(16), Tapanya 
S(4).

Author information:
(1)University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts.
(2)Duke University, Durham, North Carolina.
(3)Universidad San Buenaventura, Medellín, Colombia.
(4)Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(5)Ateneo de Manila University, Quezon City, Philippines.
(6)Hashemite University, Zarqa, Jordan.
(7)Emirates College for Advanced Education, Abu Dhabi, UAE.
(8)University of Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy.
(9)Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, Bethesda, Maryland.
(10)Institute for Fiscal Studies, London, UK.
(11)University of Macau, Zhuhai, China.
(12)Università di Roma "La Sapienza", Rome, Italy.
(13)Maseno University, Maseno, Kenya.
(14)University West, Trollhättan, Sweden.
(15)Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(16)King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

The current longitudinal study is the first comparative investigation across 
low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) to test the hypothesis that harsher and 
less affectionate maternal parenting (child age 14 years, on average) 
statistically mediates the prediction from prior household chaos and 
neighborhood danger (at 13 years) to subsequent adolescent maladjustment 
(externalizing, internalizing, and school performance problems at 15 years). The 
sample included 511 urban families in six LMICs: China, Colombia, Jordan, Kenya, 
the Philippines, and Thailand. Multigroup structural equation modeling showed 
consistent associations between chaos, danger, affectionate and harsh parenting, 
and adolescent adjustment problems. There was some support for the hypothesis, 
with nearly all countries showing a modest indirect effect of maternal hostility 
(but not affection) for adolescent externalizing, internalizing, and scholastic 
problems. Results provide further evidence that chaotic home and dangerous 
neighborhood environments increase risk for adolescent maladjustment in LMIC 
contexts, via harsher maternal parenting.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12855
PMCID: PMC6713579
PMID: 31077512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement The authors have 
no conflicts of interest.


162. Dev Sci. 2020 Jul;23(4):e12910. doi: 10.1111/desc.12910. Epub 2019 Nov 22.

Short-term numerosity training promotes symbolic arithmetic in children with 
developmental dyscalculia: The mediating role of visual form perception.

Cheng D(1)(2)(3), Xiao Q(4), Cui J(1)(2)(5), Chen C(6), Zeng J(7), Chen Q(3), 
Zhou X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning & IDG/McGovern 
Institute for Brain Research, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China.
(2)Advanced Innovation Center for Future Education, Beijing Normal University, 
Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing, 
China.
(4)Chinese Teaching Department, Beijing Chinese Language and Culture College, 
Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Psychology, College of Education, Hebei Normal University, 
Shijiazhuang, China.
(6)Department of Psychological Science, University of California, Irvine, CA, 
USA.
(7)Business School, Beijing Wuzi University, Beijing, China.

Studies have shown that numerosity-based arithmetic training can promote 
arithmetic learning in typically developing children as well as children with 
developmental dyscalculia (DD), but the cognitive mechanism underlying this 
training effect remains unclear. The main aim of the current study was to 
examine the role of visual form perception in arithmetic improvement through an 
8-day numerosity training for DD children. Eighty DD children were selected from 
four Chinese primary schools. They were randomly divided into the intervention 
and control groups. The intervention group received training on an 
apple-collecting game, whereas the control group received an English dictation 
task. Children's cognitive and arithmetic performances were assessed before and 
after training. The results showed that the intervention group showed a 
significant improvement in arithmetic performance, approximate number system 
(ANS) acuity, and visual form perception, but not in spatial processing and 
sentence comprehension. The control group showed no significant improvement in 
any cognitive ability. Mediation analysis further showed that training-related 
improvement in arithmetic performance was fully mediated by the improvement in 
visual form perception. The results suggest that short-term numerosity training 
enhances the arithmetic performance of DD children by improving their visual 
form perception.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12910
PMID: 31599035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e13001. doi: 10.1111/desc.13001. Epub 2020 Jun 25.

Late- but not early-onset blindness impairs the development of audio-haptic 
multisensory integration.

Scheller M(1), Proulx MJ(1), de Haan M(2), Dahlmann-Noor A(3)(4), Petrini K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Bath, London, UK.
(2)Developmental Neurosciences Programme, University College London, London, UK.
(3)NIHR Biomedical Research Centre Moorfields, London, UK.
(4)Paediatric Service, Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, UK.

Integrating different senses to reduce sensory uncertainty and increase 
perceptual precision can have an important compensatory function for individuals 
with visual impairment and blindness. However, how visual impairment and 
blindness impact the development of optimal multisensory integration in the 
remaining senses is currently unknown. Here we first examined how audio-haptic 
integration develops and changes across the life span in 92 sighted 
(blindfolded) individuals between 7 and 70 years of age. We used a 
child-friendly task in which participants had to discriminate different object 
sizes by touching them and/or listening to them. We assessed whether 
audio-haptic performance resulted in a reduction of perceptual uncertainty 
compared to auditory-only and haptic-only performance as predicted by 
maximum-likelihood estimation model. We then compared how this ability develops 
in 28 children and adults with different levels of visual experience, focussing 
on low-vision individuals and blind individuals that lost their sight at 
different ages during development. Our results show that in sighted individuals, 
adult-like audio-haptic integration develops around 13-15 years of age, and 
remains stable until late adulthood. While early-blind individuals, even at the 
youngest ages, integrate audio-haptic information in an optimal fashion, 
late-blind individuals do not. Optimal integration in low-vision individuals 
follows a similar developmental trajectory as that of sighted individuals. These 
findings demonstrate that visual experience is not necessary for optimal 
audio-haptic integration to emerge, but that consistency of sensory information 
across development is key for the functional outcome of optimal multisensory 
integration.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13001
PMID: 32506580


164. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12874. doi: 10.1111/desc.12874. Epub 2019 Jun 28.

Joint roles of parenting and nutritional status for child development: Evidence 
from rural Cambodia.

Berkes J(1), Raikes A(2), Bouguen A(3), Filmer D(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Education and Family, German Institute for Economic Research 
(DIW Berlin) and Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska.
(3)University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, Northern California.
(4)World Bank, Washington, District of Columbia.

Substantial work has demonstrated that early nutrition and home environments, 
including the degree to which children receive cognitive stimulation and 
emotional support from parents, play a profound role in influencing early 
childhood development. Yet, less work has documented the joint influences of 
parenting and nutritional status on child development among children in the 
preschool years living in low-income countries. Using panel data from 2016 to 
2017 on the parenting, nutritional status, and early developmental outcomes 
(executive function, language, early numeracy, and socioemotional problems) of 
6,508 Cambodian children ages 3-5 years, our findings demonstrate that 
inequities in early development associated with family wealth are evident at age 
3 and increase among children ages 4 and 5 years. Using hierarchical regression 
analysis, a significant share of these inequalities is explained by differences 
in parenting and early nutritional status, measured by stunting. Better-educated 
parents engage in more stimulating and supportive parenting practices. However, 
the positive association between parenting and language and early numeracy 
outcomes is 35-54% stronger for non-stunted children, and parental activities 
explain only about 8-14% of the cognitive gap between the lowest and highest 
wealth quintiles. The results highlight the need for additional research 
outlining interactions between environmental factors that link family wealth and 
child development.

© 2019 The World Bank. Developmental Science © 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12874
PMID: 31148355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Dev Sci. 2020 Mar;23(2):e12901. doi: 10.1111/desc.12901. Epub 2019 Oct 29.

What do bilingual infants actually hear? Evaluating measures of language input 
to bilingual-learning 10-month-olds.

Orena AJ(1)(2), Byers-Heinlein K(2)(3)(4), Polka L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Communication Sciences & Disorders, McGill University, Montréal, 
Québec.
(2)Centre for Research on Brain, Language and Music, McGill University, 
Montréal, Québec.
(3)Department of Psychology, Concordia University, Montréal, Québec.
(4)Centre for Research in Human Development, Concordia University, Montréal, 
Québec.

Examining how bilingual infants experience their dual language input is 
important for understanding bilingual language acquisition. To assess these 
language experiences, researchers typically conduct language interviews with 
caregivers. However, little is known about the reliability of these parent 
reports in describing how bilingual children actually experience dual language 
input. Here, we explored the quantitative nature of dual language input to 
bilingual infants. Furthermore, we described some of the heterogeneity of 
bilingual exposure in a sample of French-English bilingual families. 
Participants were 21 families with a 10-month-old infant residing in Montréal, 
Canada. First, we conducted language interviews with the caregivers. Then, each 
family completed three full-day recordings at home using the Language 
Environment Analysis recording system. Results showed that children's proportion 
exposure to each language was consistent across the two measurement approaches, 
indicating that parent reports are reliable for assessing a bilingual child's 
language experiences. Further exploratory analyses revealed three unique 
findings: (a) there can be considerable variability in the absolute amount of 
input among infants hearing the same proportion of input, (b) infants can hear 
different proportions of language input when considering infant-directed versus 
overheard speech, (c) proportion of language input can vary by day, depending on 
who is caring for the infant. We conclude that collecting naturalistic 
recordings is complementary to parent-report measures for assessing infant's 
language experiences and for establishing bilingual profiles.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12901
PMID: 31505096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12806. doi: 10.1111/desc.12806. Epub 2019 Mar 18.

Mechanisms linking height to early child development among infants and 
preschoolers in rural India.

Black MM(1)(2), Yimgang DP(3), Hurley KM(4), Harding KB(5), Fernandez-Rao S(6), 
Balakrishna N(6), Radhakrishna KV(6), Reinhart GA(7), Nair KM(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD.
(2)RTI International, Research Triangle Park, NC.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Maryland School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.
(4)Center for Human Nutrition, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, MD.
(5)Nutrition International, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(6)National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
(7)Mathile Institute for the Advancement of Human Nutrition, Dayton, OH.

Stunting has been negatively associated with children's development. We examined 
the range of height by testing hypotheses: (a) height is positively associated 
with children's development, with associations moderated by inflammation and (b) 
home environments characterized by nurturance and early learning opportunities 
is positively associated with children's development over time and attenuate 
associations with height. Data included 513 infants (mean age 8.6 months) and 
316 preschoolers (mean age 36.6 months) in rural India from a randomized 
controlled trial of multiple micronutrient powders (MNPs). Measures included 
height (height-for-age z-scores based on WHO standards), inflammation 
(C-reactive protein concentration >5 mg/L), nurturance (HOME Inventory), child 
development (Mullens Scales of Early Learning), and inhibitory control 
(preschoolers). Linear mixed effects models accounting for repeated measures, 
clustering, and confounders were used to assess associations between height and 
child development over time (infants: enrollment, 6 and 12 months; preschoolers: 
enrollment and 8 months). Moderating effects of inflammation and nurturance were 
tested with interaction terms. Among infants and preschoolers, height and 
nurturance were positively associated with all domains of child development over 
time, with the exception of inhibitory control. Among preschoolers, in the 
presence of inflammation, height was not associated with child development. 
Among infants, but not preschoolers, a nurturant home environment attenuated 
significant associations between height with fine motor and receptive language 
development. The mechanisms associated with children's development over time are 
multifactorial and include direct and indirect associations among nutrition, 
health, and the home environment, as supported by the Nurturing Care Framework.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12806
PMCID: PMC7428854
PMID: 30715779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None of the authors has a 
conflict of interest. Kimberly Harding is an employee of Nutrition International 
(formerly Micronutrient Initiative) and Gregory Reinhart was formerly an 
employee of The Mathile Institute for the Advancement of Human Nutrition.


167. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12957. doi: 10.1111/desc.12957. Epub 2020 Mar 24.

Predictors of mathematics in primary school: Magnitude comparison, verbal and 
spatial working memory measures.

Caviola S(1)(2), Colling LJ(2)(3), Mammarella IC(4), Szűcs D(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
(2)Department of Psychology, Centre for Neuroscience in Education, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)School of Psychology, University of Sussex, Brighton, UK.
(4)Department of Developmental Psychology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.

We determined the relative importance of the so-called approximate number system 
(ANS), symbolic number comparison (SNC) and verbal and spatial short-term and 
working memory (WM) capacity for mathematics achievement in 1,254 Grade 2, 4 and 
6 children. The large sample size assured high power and low false report 
probability and allowed us to determine effect sizes precisely. We used reading 
decoding as a control outcome measure to test whether findings were specific to 
mathematics. Bayesian analysis allowed us to provide support for both null and 
alternative hypotheses. We found very weak zero-order correlations between ANS 
measures and math achievement. These correlations were not specific to 
mathematics, became non-significant once intelligence was considered and ANS 
measures were not selected as predictors of math by regression models. In 
contrast, overall SNC accuracy and spatial WM measures were reliable and mostly 
specific predictors of math achievement. Verbal short-term and WM and SNC 
reaction time were predictors of both reading and math achievement. We conclude 
that ANS tasks are not suitable as measures of math development in school-age 
populations. In contrast, all other cognitive functions we studied are promising 
markers of mathematics development.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12957
PMID: 32112457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12931. doi: 10.1111/desc.12931. Epub 2020 Jan 8.

Gender gaps in cognitive and social-emotional skills in early primary grades: 
Evidence from rural Indonesia.

Nakajima N(1), Jung H(2), Pradhan M(3), Hasan A(4), Kinnell A(5), Brinkman S(6).

Author information:
(1)Harvard Graduate School of Education, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Public Administration, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea.
(3)University of Amsterdam and VU University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Education Global Practice, Washington, DC, USA.
(5)School of Psychology, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.
(6)Fraser Mustard Centre, Telethon Kids Institute, University of Western 
Australia, Perth, Australia.

This paper examines the magnitude and source of gender gaps in cognitive and 
social-emotional skills in early primary grades in rural Indonesia. Relative to 
boys, girls score more than 0.17 SD higher in tests of language and mathematics 
(cognitive skills) and between 0.18 and 0.27 SD higher in measures of social 
competence and emotional maturity (social-emotional skills). We use 
Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition to investigate the extent to which gender 
differences in early schooling and parenting practices explain these gender gaps 
in skills. For cognitive skills, differences in early schooling between boys and 
girls explain between 9% and 11% of the gender gap whereas differences in 
parenting practices explain merely 3%-5% of the gender gap. This decomposition 
result is driven largely by children living in villages with high-quality 
preschools. In contrast, for social-emotional skills, differences in parenting 
styles toward boys and girls explain between 13% and 17% of the gender gap, 
while differences in early schooling explain only 0%-6% of the gender gap.

© 2019 The World Bank Developmental Science © 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12931
PMID: 31823450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Dev Sci. 2020 Jan;23(1):e12838. doi: 10.1111/desc.12838. Epub 2019 May 17.

Water contaminant levels interact with parenting environment to predict 
development of depressive symptoms in adolescents.

Manczak EM(1), Miller JG(2), Gotlib IH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Denver, Denver, Colorado.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, 
Stanford, California.
(3)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, California.

Contaminants in drinking water, such as lead, nitrate, and arsenic, have been 
linked to negative physical health outcomes. We know less, however, about 
whether such pollutants also predict mental health problems and, if so, the 
conditions under which such effects are strongest. In this longitudinal study, 
we examined whether drinking water contaminants interact with negative family 
environments (parental psychological control) to predict changes in depressive 
symptoms in 110 adolescents-a developmental period when symptoms often first 
emerge. We found that for adolescents in psychologically controlling families, 
levels of drinking water contaminants prospectively predicted depressive 
symptoms 2 years later; this effect was not present in adolescents in 
non-controlling families. Importantly, these associations were not accounted for 
by family- or community-level socioeconomic resources, demographic features, or 
by the adolescents' stress exposure. These findings highlight the interplay of 
physical and psychological environments in influencing depressive symptoms in 
adolescents. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at 
https://youtu.be/thBV-DwnGcY.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12838
PMID: 31009144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Dev Sci. 2020 Jan;23(1):e12891. doi: 10.1111/desc.12891. Epub 2019 Aug 22.

Modeling development of frontal electroencephalogram (EEG) asymmetry: Sex 
differences and links with temperament.

Gartstein MA(1), Hancock GR(2), Potapova NV(1), Calkins SD(3), Bell MA(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USA.
(2)Department of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology, Measurement, 
Statistics and Evaluation (EDMS), College Park, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Human Development and Family Studies, Greensboro, 
NC, USA.
(4)Department of Pschology, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA.

Asymmetric patterns of frontal brain electrical activity reflect approach and 
avoidance tendencies, with stability of relative right activation associated 
with withdrawal emotions/motivation and left hemisphere activation linked with 
approach and positive affect. However, considerable shifts in 
approach/avoidance-related lateralization have been reported for children not 
targeted because of extreme temperament. In this study, dynamic effects of 
frontal electroencephalogram (EEG) power within and across hemispheres were 
examined throughout early childhood. Specifically, EEG indicators at 5, 10, 24, 
36, 48, and 72 months-of-age (n = 410) were analyzed via a hybrid of difference 
score and panel design models, with baseline measures and subsequent 
time-to-time differences modeled as potentially influencing all subsequent 
amounts of time-to-time change (i.e., predictively saturated). Infant sex was 
considered as a moderator of dynamic developmental effects, with temperament 
attributes measured at 5 months examined as predictors of EEG hemisphere 
development. Overall, change in left and right frontal EEG power predicted 
declining subsequent change in the same hemisphere, with effects on the opposing 
neurobehavioral system enhancing later growth. Infant sex moderated the pattern 
of within and across-hemisphere effects, wherein for girls more prominent left 
hemisphere influences on the right hemisphere EEG changes were noted and right 
hemisphere effects were more salient for boys. Largely similar patterns of 
temperament prediction were observed for the left and the right EEG power 
changes, with limited sex differences in links between temperament and growth 
parameters. Results were interpreted in the context of comparable analyses using 
parietal power values, which provided evidence for unique frontal effects.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12891
PMCID: PMC6893078
PMID: 31359565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement None of the 
contributing authors have any conflicts of interest to report.


171. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12716. doi: 10.1111/desc.12716. Epub 2018 Aug 29.

The ontogeny of intentional communication in chimpanzees in the wild.

Fröhlich M(1)(2), Wittig RM(3)(4), Pika S(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anthropology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Humboldt Research Group 'Evolution of Communication', Max Planck Institute 
for Ornithology, Seewiesen, Germany.
(3)Department of Primatology, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Taï Chimpanzee Project, Centre Suisse de Recherches Scientifiques, Abidjan, 
Côte d'Ivoire.
(5)Comparative Biocognition, Institute of Cognitive Science, University of 
Osnabrück, Osnabrück, Germany.

The onset of intentional communication in children's first year of life 
represents a major milestone in human cognitive development. Similarly, it is 
well established that our closest living relatives, the great apes, communicate 
with signals characterized by at least first-order intentionality. Despite the 
well-documented influence of developmental experiences on socio-cognitive 
abilities in apes, the developmental trajectory of intentional signal use as 
well as effects of social exposure remain poorly understood under naturalistic 
conditions. Here, we addressed these issues by studying the ontogeny of 
intentional communication in chimpanzee infants of two subspecies (Pan 
troglodytes schweinfurthii/verus) and communities living in their natural 
environments. Overall, we found that gestures and bimodal signal combinations 
were most commonly accompanied by markers of intentional communication: audience 
checking, persistence to the goal, and sensitivity to recipient's attentional 
state. Within individuals, the proportion of communicative behaviours associated 
with goal persistence and sensitivity to attention increased with age. 
Cross-sectional comparisons between infants revealed an age effect on the use of 
audience checking. Context, interaction partner and site affiliation affected 
the production of specific markers irrespective of infants' age. The present 
study provided hitherto undocumented evidence for the development of three 
important markers of intentional communication in great apes. Moreover, our 
results suggest that social exposure impacts early intentional signal use.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12716
PMID: 30156360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12698. doi: 10.1111/desc.12698. Epub 2018 Jun 25.

Neural representations of the body in 60-day-old human infants.

Meltzoff AN(1), Saby JN(2), Marshall PJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Learning & Brain Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington.
(2)Department of Radiology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania.
(3)Department of Psychology, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

The organization of body representations in the adult brain has been well 
documented. Little is understood about this aspect of brain organization in 
human infancy. The current study employed electroencephalography (EEG) with 
60-day-old infants to test the distribution of brain responses to tactile 
stimulation of three different body parts: hand, foot, and lip. Analyses focused 
on a prominent positive response occurring at 150-200 ms in the somatosensory 
evoked potential at central and parietal electrode sites. The results show 
differential electrophysiological signatures for touch of these three body 
parts. Stimulation of the left hand was associated with greater positive 
amplitude over the lateral central region contralateral to the side stimulated. 
Left foot stimulation was associated with greater positivity over the midline 
parietal site. Stimulation of the midline of the upper lip was associated with a 
strong bilateral response over the central region. These findings provide new 
insights into the neural representation of the body in infancy and shed light on 
research and theories about the involvement of somatosensory cortex in infant 
imitation and social perception.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12698
PMID: 29938877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12721. doi: 10.1111/desc.12721. Epub 2018 Aug 29.

Sex differences in ADHD trajectories across childhood and adolescence.

Murray AL(1), Booth T(2), Eisner M(1), Auyeung B(2), Murray G(3), Ribeaud D(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Criminology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(3)Department of Psychology, Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(4)Jacob's Center for Productive Youth Development, University of Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland.

Previous studies have hinted at sex differences in developmental trajectories in 
ADHD symptoms; however, little is known about the nature or cause of these 
differences and their implications for clinical practice. We used growth mixture 
modelling in a community-ascertained cohort of n = 1,571 participants to study 
sex differences in ADHD symptom developmental trajectories across the elementary 
and secondary school years. Participants were measured at ages 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 
12, 13, and 15. We found that females were more likely to show large symptom 
increases in early adolescence while males were more likely to show elevated 
symptoms from childhood. For both males and females, early adolescence 
represented a period of vulnerability characterized by relatively sudden symptom 
increases. Females affected by hyperactivity/impulsivity may be more likely to 
be excluded from diagnosis due to current age of onset criteria. More attention 
should be paid to early adolescence as a period of risk for 
hyperactivity/impulsivity symptom onset or worsening.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12721
PMID: 30156362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12972. doi: 10.1111/desc.12972. Epub 2020 May 21.

Action selection in imitation: Why do we still need the teleological stance? 
Commentary on 'The teleological stance: Past, present, and future' by Juvrud and 
Gredeback.

Király I(1)(2), Oláh K(1).

Author information:
(1)MTA-ELTE Momentum Social Minds Research Group, Eötvös Loránd University, 
Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Cognitive Development Center, Central European University, Budapest, Hungary.

The teleological stance and natural pedagogy are integrated as a system for 
representing the teleological structure of novel events, including causally 
opaque ones. In this sense, the teleological stance allows children to build a 
goal hierarchy, based on which they become able to select the actions to 
perform.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12972
PMID: 32304169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12945. doi: 10.1111/desc.12945. Epub 2020 Apr 23.

Subcortical auditory neural synchronization is deficient in pre-reading children 
who develop dyslexia.

De Vos A(1)(2), Vanvooren S(1)(2), Ghesquière P(2), Wouters J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Research Group Experimental ORL, KU Leuven - 
University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Parenting and Special Education Research Unit, Faculty of Psychology and 
Educational Sciences, KU Leuven - University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Auditory processing of temporal information in speech is sustained by 
synchronized firing of neurons along the entire auditory pathway. In school-aged 
children and adults with dyslexia, neural synchronization deficits have been 
found at cortical levels of the auditory system, however, these deficits do not 
appear to be present in pre-reading children. An alternative role for 
subcortical synchronization in reading development and dyslexia has been 
suggested, but remains debated. By means of a longitudinal study, we assessed 
cognitive reading-related skills and subcortical auditory steady-state responses 
(80 Hz ASSRs) in a group of children before formal reading instruction 
(pre-reading), after 1 year of formal reading instruction (beginning reading), 
and after 3 years of formal reading instruction (more advanced reading). 
Children were retrospectively classified into three groups based on family risk 
and literacy achievement: typically developing children without a family risk 
for dyslexia, typically developing children with a family risk for dyslexia, and 
children who developed dyslexia. Our results reveal that children who developed 
dyslexia demonstrate decreased 80 Hz ASSRs at the pre-reading stage. This effect 
is no longer present after the onset of reading instruction, due to an atypical 
developmental increase in 80 Hz ASSRs between the pre-reading and the beginning 
reading stage. A forward stepwise logistic regression analysis showed that 
literacy achievement was predictable with an accuracy of 90.4% based on a model 
including three significant predictors, that is, family risk for dyslexia 
(R = .31), phonological awareness (R = .23), and 80 Hz ASSRs (R = .26). Given 
that (1) abnormalities in subcortical ASSRs preceded reading acquisition in 
children who developed dyslexia and (2) subcortical ASSRs contributed to the 
prediction of literacy achievement, subcortical auditory synchronization 
deficits may constitute a pre-reading risk factor in the emergence of dyslexia.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12945
PMID: 32034978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12964. doi: 10.1111/desc.12964. Epub 2020 Mar 31.

Math anxiety and math achievement: The effects of emotional and math strategy 
training.

Passolunghi MC(1), De Vita C(1), Pellizzoni S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.

Math anxiety (MA) is a specific feeling of tension generated by the manipulation 
of numerical stimuli in daily life and academic situations (Richardson & Suinn, 
1972). This condition has significant repercussions on the individual's life at 
personal, social, and economic level. Literature on the topic of MA alleviation, 
however, is still scarce. This study aims at contributing to this field by 
addressing MA prevention in school-age children. We have developed two different 
training methods administered to two groups of fourth graders: (a) MA training 
focusing on identifying and copying with MA-related feelings (N = 76); and (b) 
Math strategy training focusing on supplementary exercises to enhance 
calculation strategies (N = 76). We also carried out a Control training 
involving a range of activities, such as reading comic strips, describing 
characters in the story, and combining text and images to obtain an original 
narrative text (N = 72). We evaluated the differential effects of these training 
methods on MA, general anxiety, and math achievement before and after the 
training. Results indicate that MA training contributes to a decrease in MA 
level, although it does not appear to affect math achievement; Math strategy 
training, on the other hand, results in far transfer on a reduction of MA level 
as well as near transfer on the improvement of math achievement. Data are 
discussed in terms of specific mechanisms underlying each type of training 
method, and with specific focus on the evaluation of educational and 
developmental opportunities linked to MA prevention and improvement of math 
abilities in school-age children.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12964
PMID: 32159906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Dev Sci. 2020 Oct 9:e13047. doi: 10.1111/desc.13047. Online ahead of print.

The effect of specific locomotor experiences on infants' avoidance behaviour on 
real and water cliffs.

Burnay C(1), Cordovil R(2), Button C(3), Croft JL(3)(4), Schofield M(5), Pereira 
J(2), Anderson DI(6).

Author information:
(1)Centre of Exercise and Sports Science Research, School of Medical and Health 
Sciences, Edith Cowan University, Joondalup, WA, Australia.
(2)Faculdade de Motricidade Humana, CIPER, Universidade de Lisboa, Cruz Quebrada 
Dafundo, Portugal.
(3)School of Physical Education, Sport and Exercise Sciences, University of 
Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(4)Faculty of Kinesiology, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(5)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Otago, Dunedin, New 
Zealand.
(6)Marian Wright Edelman Institute, San Francisco State University, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.

Infants' avoidance of drop-offs has been described as an affordance learning 
that is not transferable between different locomotor postures. In addition, 
there is evidence that infants perceive and act similarly around real and water 
cliffs. This cross-sectional study investigated the effects of specific 
locomotor experiences on infants' avoidance behaviour using the Real Cliff/Water 
Cliff paradigm. The experiments included 102 infants, 58 crawling, but 
pre-walking, infants (Mage  = 11.57 months, SD = 1.65) with crawling experience 
ranging between 0.03 and 7.4 months (M = 2.16, SD = 1.71) and 44 walking infants 
(Mage  = 14.82 months, SD = 1.99), with walking experience ranging between 0.13 
and 5.2 months (M = 1.86, SD = 1.28). The association between crawling 
experience and crawlers' avoidance of the real and water cliffs was confirmed. 
Importantly, crawling and total self-produced locomotor experience, and not 
walking experience, were associated with walkers' avoidance behaviour on both 
cliffs. These results suggest that some degree of perceptual learning acquired 
through crawling experience was developmentally transferred to the walking 
posture. A longer duration of crawling experience facilitates a more rapid 
recalibration to the new walking capability. In addition, there was no 
difference in infants' avoidance of falling on the real and the water cliff. 
However, infants explored the water cliff more than the real cliff, revealing 
more enticement to examine bodies of water than for drop-offs. A video abstract 
of this article can be viewed at https://youtu.be/23LXIGiLhHI.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13047
PMID: 33037732


178. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12959. doi: 10.1111/desc.12959. Epub 2020 Mar 20.

Changes in working memory influence the transition from reactive to proactive 
cognitive control during childhood.

Troller-Renfree SV(1), Buzzell GA(1), Fox NA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology, University of 
Maryland, College Park, MD, USA.

Cognitive control develops rapidly over the first decade of life, with one of 
the dominant changes being a transition from reliance on 'as-needed' control 
(reactive control) to a more planful, sustained form of control (proactive 
control). Although the emergence of proactive control is important for mature 
behavior, we know little about how this transition takes place, the neural 
correlates of this transition, and whether development of executive functions 
influences the ability to adopt a proactive control strategy. This study 
addresses these questions, focusing on the transition from reactive to proactive 
control in a cross-sectional sample of 79 children-forty-one 5-year-olds and 
thirty-eight 9-year-olds. Children completed an adapted version of the 
AX-Continuous Performance Task while electroencephalography was recorded and a 
standardized executive function battery was administered. Results revealed 
5-year-olds predominantly employed reactive strategies, whereas 9-year-olds used 
proactive strategies. Use of proactive control was predicted by working memory 
ability, above and beyond other executive functions. Moreover, when enacting 
proactive control, greater increases in neural activity underlying working 
memory updating were observed; links between working memory ability and 
proactive control strategy use were mediated by such neural activity. These 
results provide convergent evidence that the transition from reactive to 
proactive control may be dependent on age-related changes in neurocognitive 
indices of working memory and that working memory may influence adopting a 
proactive control strategy.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12959
PMID: 32141641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Dev Sci. 2019 Nov;22(6):e12819. doi: 10.1111/desc.12819. Epub 2019 Apr 30.

Improved set-size labeling mediates the effect of a counting intervention on 
children's understanding of cardinality.

O'Rear CD(1), McNeil NM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana.

How does improving children's ability to label set sizes without counting affect 
the development of understanding of the cardinality principle? It may accelerate 
development by facilitating subsequent alignment and comparison of the cardinal 
label for a given set and the last word counted when counting that set (Mix et 
al., 2012). Alternatively, it may delay development by decreasing the need for a 
comprehensive abstract principle to understand and label exact numerosities 
(Piantadosi et al., 2012). In this study, preschoolers (N = 106, Mage   = 4;8) 
were randomly assigned to one of three conditions: (a) count-and-label, wherein 
children spent 6 weeks both counting and labeling sets arranged in canonical 
patterns like pips on a die; (b) label-first,wherein children spent the first 
3 weeks learning to label the set sizes without counting before spending 3 weeks 
identical to the count-and-label condition; (c) print referencing control. Both 
counting conditions improved understanding of cardinality through increases in 
children's ability to label set sizes without counting. In addition to this 
indirect effect, there was a direct effect of the count-and-label condition on 
progress toward understanding of cardinality. Results highlight the roles of set 
labeling and equifinality in the development of children's understanding of 
number concepts.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12819
PMID: 30779262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12839. doi: 10.1111/desc.12839. Epub 2019 May 17.

Using functional near-infrared spectroscopy to assess social information 
processing in poor urban Bangladeshi infants and toddlers.

Perdue KL(1)(2), Jensen SKG(1)(2), Kumar S(1), Richards JE(3), Kakon SH(4), 
Haque R(4), Petri WA Jr(5), Lloyd-Fox S(6)(7), Elwell C(8), Nelson CA(1)(2)(9).

Author information:
(1)Labs of Cognitive Neuroscience, Division of Developmental Medicine, Boston 
Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina.
(4)Icddrb, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(5)University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia.
(6)Birkbeck College, London, UK.
(7)University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(8)University College London, London, UK.
(9)Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Children living in low-resource settings are at risk for failing to reach their 
developmental potential. While the behavioral outcomes of growing up in such 
settings are well-known, the neural mechanisms underpinning poor outcomes have 
not been well elucidated, particularly in the context of low- and middle-income 
countries. In this study, we measure brain metabolic responses to social and 
nonsocial stimuli in a cohort of 6- and 36-month-old Bangladeshi children. Study 
participants in both cohorts lived in an urban slum and were exposed to a broad 
range of adversity early in life including extreme poverty, malnutrition, 
recurrent infections, and low maternal education. We observed brain regions that 
responded selectively to social stimuli in both ages indicating that these 
specialized brain responses are online from an early age. We additionally show 
that the magnitude of the socially selective response is related to maternal 
education, maternal stress, and the caregiving environment. Ultimately our 
results suggest that a variety of psychosocial hazards have a measurable 
relationship with the developing social brain.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12839
PMCID: PMC6737924
PMID: 31017372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


181. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12937. doi: 10.1111/desc.12937. Epub 2020 Jun 18.

Individual differences in executive function partially explain the socioeconomic 
gradient in middle-school academic achievement.

Albert WD(1), Hanson JL(2), Skinner AT(3), Dodge KA(3), Steinberg L(4), 
Deater-Deckard K(5), Bornstein MH(6)(7), Lansford JE(3).

Author information:
(1)Bryn Mawr College, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)Center for Child and Family Policy, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(4)Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)University of Massachusetts at Amherst, Amherst, MA, USA.
(6)Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(7)Institute for Fiscal Studies, London, UK.

Children from families with low socioeconomic status (SES) earn lower grades, 
perform worse on achievement tests, and attain less education on average than 
their peers from higher-SES families. We evaluated neurocognitive mediators of 
SES disparities in achievement in a diverse sample of youth whose data were 
linked to administrative records of performance on school-administered tests of 
7th grade reading and math proficiency (N = 203). We used structural equation 
modeling to evaluate whether associations between SES (measured at ages 8-9) and 
achievement (measured at age 13) are mediated by verbal ability and executive 
function (measured at age 10), a suite of top-down mental processes that 
facilitate control of thinking and behavior. Children from relatively higher-SES 
families performed better than their lower-SES peers on all neurocognitive and 
achievement measures, and SES disparities in both reading and math achievement 
were partially mediated by variation in executive function, but not verbal 
ability. SES disparities in executive function explained approximately 37% of 
the SES gap in math achievement and 17% of the SES gap in reading achievement. 
Exploratory modeling suggests that SES-related variation in working memory may 
play a particularly prominent role in mediation. We discuss potential 
implications of these findings for research, intervention programming, and 
classroom practice.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12937
PMCID: PMC7392118
PMID: 31912610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e12984. doi: 10.1111/desc.12984. Epub 2020 Jun 2.

EEG phase synchronization during semantic unification relates to individual 
differences in children's vocabulary skill.

Panda EJ(1)(2), Emami Z(1)(3), Valiante TA(2)(4)(5), Pang EW(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Neurosciences and Mental Health, SickKids Research Institute, Peter Gilgan 
Centre for Research and Learning, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(2)Epilespy Research Program of the Ontario Brain Institute, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(3)Division of Neurology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Krembil Research Institute, University Health Network and Toronto Western 
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Surgery, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

As we listen to speech, our ability to understand what was said requires us to 
retrieve and bind together individual word meanings into a coherent discourse 
representation. This so-called semantic unification is a fundamental cognitive 
skill, and its development relies on the integration of neural activity 
throughout widely distributed functional brain networks. In this 
proof-of-concept study, we examine, for the first time, how these functional 
brain networks develop in children. Twenty-six children (ages 4-17) listened to 
well-formed sentences and sentences containing a semantic violation, while EEG 
was recorded. Children with stronger vocabulary showed N400 effects that were 
more concentrated to centroparietal electrodes and greater EEG phase synchrony 
(phase lag index; PLI) between right centroparietal and bilateral frontocentral 
electrodes in the delta frequency band (1-3 Hz) 1.27-1.53 s after listening to 
well-formed sentences compared to sentences containing a semantic violation. 
These effects related specifically to individual differences in receptive 
vocabulary, perhaps pointing to greater recruitment of functional brain networks 
important for top-down semantic unification with development. Less skilled 
children showed greater delta phase synchrony for violation sentences 
3.41-3.64 s after critical word onset. This later effect was partly driven by 
individual differences in nonverbal reasoning, perhaps pointing to non-verbal 
compensatory processing to extract meaning from speech in children with less 
developed vocabulary. We suggest that functional brain network communication, as 
measured by momentary changes in the phase synchrony of EEG oscillations, 
develops throughout the school years to support language comprehension in 
different ways depending on children's verbal and nonverbal skill levels.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12984
PMID: 32384181


183. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e13040. doi: 10.1111/desc.13040. Epub 2020 Nov 17.

Inhibitory control and set shifting describe different pathways from behavioral 
inhibition to socially anxious behavior.

Buzzell GA(1), Morales S(1), Bowers ME(2), Troller-Renfree SV(3), 
Chronis-Tuscano A(1), Pine DS(4), Henderson HA(5), Fox NA(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA.
(2)Neuroscience and Cognitive Science Program, University of Maryland, College 
Park, MD, USA.
(3)Teachers College of Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(4)National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), Bethesda, MD, USA.
(5)University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada.

Individuals with a behaviorally inhibited (BI) temperament are more likely to 
develop social anxiety. However, the mechanisms by which socially anxious 
behavior emerges from BI are unclear. Variation in different forms of top-down 
control, specifically executive functions (EF), may play distinct roles and 
characterize differential pathways to social anxiety. Here 291 children were 
assessed for BI in toddlerhood (ages 2 and 3), parent-reported inhibitory 
control and set shifting during middle childhood (age 7), and multidimensional 
assessment of socially anxious behavior completed during late childhood and 
early adolescence (ages 9 and 12). Structural equation modeling revealed that 
early variation in BI predicted the development of socially anxious behavior 
through either higher levels of parent-reported inhibitory control or lower 
levels of parent-reported set shifting. These data reinforce the notion that 
top-down control does not uniformly influence relations between temperament and 
socially anxious behavior. These data suggest novel approaches to thinking about 
the role of EFs and social anxiety outcomes as children approach adolescence.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13040
PMID: 33021017


184. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e13002. doi: 10.1111/desc.13002. Epub 2020 Jul 6.

Bridging ears and eyes when learning spoken words: On the effects of bilingual 
experience at 30 months.

Havy M(1), Zesiger PE(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, Geneva University, Geneva, 
Switzerland.

From the very first moments of their lives, infants selectively attend to the 
visible orofacial movements of their social partners and apply their exquisite 
speech perception skills to the service of lexical learning. Here we explore how 
early bilingual experience modulates children's ability to use visible speech as 
they form new lexical representations. Using a cross-modal word-learning task, 
bilingual children aged 30 months were tested on their ability to learn new 
lexical mappings in either the auditory or the visual modality. Lexical 
recognition was assessed either in the same modality as the one used at learning 
('same modality' condition: auditory test after auditory learning, visual test 
after visual learning) or in the other modality ('cross-modality' condition: 
visual test after auditory learning, auditory test after visual learning). The 
results revealed that like their monolingual peers, bilingual children 
successfully learn new words in either the auditory or the visual modality and 
show cross-modal recognition of words following auditory learning. 
Interestingly, as opposed to monolinguals, they also demonstrate cross-modal 
recognition of words upon visual learning. Collectively, these findings indicate 
a bilingual edge in visual word learning, expressed in the capacity to form a 
recoverable cross-modal representation of visually learned words.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13002
PMID: 32506622


185. Dev Sci. 2019 Nov;22(6):e12836. doi: 10.1111/desc.12836. Epub 2019 May 10.

Sensitivity to amplitude envelope rise time in infancy and vocabulary 
development at 3 years: A significant relationship.

Kalashnikova M(1)(2), Goswami U(3), Burnham D(2).

Author information:
(1)BCBL, Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language, Donostia, Spain.
(2)The MARCS Institute for Brain, Behaviour and Development, Western Sydney 
University, Penrith, Australia.
(3)Centre for Neuroscience in Education, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Here we report, for the first time, a relationship between sensitivity to 
amplitude envelope rise time in infants and their later vocabulary development. 
Recent research in auditory neuroscience has revealed that amplitude envelope 
rise time plays a mechanistic role in speech encoding. Accordingly, individual 
differences in infant discrimination of amplitude envelope rise times could be 
expected to relate to individual differences in language acquisition. A group of 
50 infants taking part in a longitudinal study contributed rise time 
discrimination thresholds when aged 7 and 10 months, and their vocabulary 
development was measured at 3 years. Experimental measures of phonological 
sensitivity were also administered at 3 years. Linear mixed effect models taking 
rise time sensitivity as the dependent variable, and controlling for non-verbal 
IQ, showed significant predictive effects for vocabulary at 3 years, but not for 
the phonological sensitivity measures. The significant longitudinal relationship 
between amplitude envelope rise time discrimination and vocabulary development 
suggests that early rise time discrimination abilities have an impact on speech 
processing by infants.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12836
PMID: 31004544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12684. doi: 10.1111/desc.12684. Epub 2018 May 15.

Attentional selection and suppression in children and adults.

Sun M(1)(2), Wang E(3), Huang J(1), Zhao C(1), Guo J(1), Li D(1), Sun L(4), Du 
B(1), Ding Y(5), Song Y(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning & IDG/McGovern 
Institute for Brain Research, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China.
(2)School of Psychological and Cognitive Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, 
China.
(3)Unit of Psychological Medicine, Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(4)Peking University Sixth Hospital / Institute of Mental Health, Beijing, 
China.
(5)Brain and Cognition Laboratory, Department of Psychology, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangdong, China.
(6)Center for Collaboration and Innovation in Brain and Learning Sciences, 
Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China.

The fundamental role of covert spatial attention is to enhance the processing of 
attended items while simultaneously ignoring irrelevant items. However, 
relatively little is known about how brain electrophysiological activities 
associated with target selection and distractor suppression are involved as they 
develop and become fully functional. The current study aimed to identify the 
neurophysiological bases of the development of covert spatial attention, 
focusing on electroencephalographic (EEG) markers of attentional selection 
(N2pc) and suppression (PD ). EEG data were collected from healthy young adults 
and typically developing children (9-15 years old) as they searched for a shape 
singleton target in either the absence or the presence of a 
salient-but-irrelevant color singleton distractor. The ERP results showed that a 
lateral shape target elicited a smaller N2pc in children compared with adults 
regardless of whether a distractor was present or not. Moreover, the 
target-elicited N2pc was always followed by a similar positivity in both age 
groups. Counterintuitively, a lateral salient-but-irrelevant distractor elicited 
a large PD in children with low behavioral accuracy, whereas high-accuracy 
children exhibited a small and "adult-like" PD . More importantly, we found no 
evidence for a correlation between the target-elicited N2pc and the 
distractor-elicited PD in either age group. Our results provide 
neurophysiological evidence for the developmental differences between target 
selection and distractor suppression. Compared with adults, 9-15-year-old 
children deploy insufficient attentional selection resources to targets but use 
"adult-like" or even more attentional suppression resources to resist irrelevant 
distractors. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NhWapx0d75I.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12684
PMID: 29761932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12928. doi: 10.1111/desc.12928. Epub 2019 Dec 30.

Cerebral blood flow in 5- to 8-month-olds: Regional tissue maturity is 
associated with infant affect.

Catalina Camacho M(1), King LS(2), Ojha A(2), Garcia CM(2), Sisk LM(2), Cichocki 
AC(2), Humphreys KL(3), Gotlib IH(2).

Author information:
(1)Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(2)Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(3)Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.

Infancy is marked by rapid neural and emotional development. The relation 
between brain function and emotion in infancy, however, is not well understood. 
Methods for measuring brain function predominantly rely on the BOLD signal; 
however, interpretation of the BOLD signal in infancy is challenging because the 
neuronal-hemodynamic relation is immature. Regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) 
provides a context for the infant BOLD signal and can yield insight into the 
developmental maturity of brain regions that may support affective behaviors. 
This study aims to elucidate the relations among rCBF, age, and emotion in 
infancy. One hundred and seven mothers reported their infants' (infant age 
M ± SD = 6.14 ± 0.51 months) temperament. A subsample of infants completed MRI 
scans, 38 of whom produced usable perfusion MRI during natural sleep to quantify 
rCBF. Mother-infant dyads completed the repeated Still-Face Paradigm, from which 
infant affect reactivity and recovery to stress were quantified. We tested 
associations of infant age at scan, temperament factor scores, and observed 
affect reactivity and recovery with voxel-wise rCBF. Infant age was positively 
associated with CBF in nearly all voxels, with peaks located in sensory cortices 
and the ventral prefrontal cortex, supporting the formulation that rCBF is an 
indicator of tissue maturity. Temperamental Negative Affect and recovery of 
positive affect following a stressor were positively associated with rCBF in 
several cortical and subcortical limbic regions, including the orbitofrontal 
cortex and inferior frontal gyrus. This finding yields insight into the nature 
of affective neurodevelopment during infancy. Specifically, infants with 
relatively increased prefrontal cortex maturity may evidence a disposition 
toward greater negative affect and negative reactivity in their daily lives yet 
show better recovery of positive affect following a social stressor.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12928
PMID: 31802580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Dev Sci. 2020 Dec 9:e13073. doi: 10.1111/desc.13073. Online ahead of print.

When event knowledge overrides word order in sentence comprehension: Learning a 
first language after childhood.

Cheng Q(1)(2), Mayberry RI(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Linguistics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.

Limited language experience in childhood is common among deaf individuals, which 
prior research has shown to lead to low levels of language processing. Although 
basic structures such as word order have been found to be resilient to 
conditions of sparse language input in early life, whether they are robust to 
conditions of extreme language delay is unknown. The sentence comprehension 
strategies of post-childhood, first-language (L1) learners of American Sign 
Language (ASL) with at least 9 years of language experience were investigated, 
in comparison to two control groups of learners with full access to language 
from birth (deaf native signers and hearing L2 learners who were native English 
speakers). The results of a sentence-to-picture matching experiment show that 
event knowledge overrides word order for post-childhood L1 learners, regardless 
of the animacy of the subject, while both deaf native signers and hearing L2 
signers consistently rely on word order to comprehend sentences. Language 
inaccessibility throughout early childhood impedes the acquisition of even basic 
word order. Similar to the strategies used by very young children prior to the 
development of basic sentence structure, post-childhood L1 learners rely more on 
context and event knowledge to comprehend sentences. Language experience during 
childhood is critical to the development of basic sentence structure.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13073
PMID: 33296520


189. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12864. doi: 10.1111/desc.12864. Epub 2019 Jun 23.

Interactive apps prevent gender discrepancies in early-grade mathematics in a 
low-income country in sub-Sahara Africa.

Pitchford NJ(1), Chigeda A(2), Hubber PJ(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(2)Chancellor College University of Malawi, Zomba, Malawi.

Globally, gender differences are reported in the early acquisition of reading 
and mathematics as girls tend to outperform boys in reading, whereas boys tend 
to outperform girls in mathematics. This can have long-term impact resulting in 
an under-representation of girls in Science, Technology, Engineering and 
Mathematics subjects. Recent research suggests that sociocultural factors 
account for differences across genders in the acquisition of these foundational 
skills. In this study, we investigated whether a new technology-based 
intervention, that included activities accessible to both boys and girls, can 
reduce gender differences from emerging during the early primary school years. 
The novel instructional method used in this study employed apps developed by 
onebillion© delivered individually through touch-screen tablets. Over a series 
of experiments conducted in Malawi, a low-income country in sub-Sahara Africa, 
we found that when children were exposed to standard pedagogical practice 
typical gender differences emerged over the first grade (Experiment 1). In 
contrast, boys and girls learnt equally well with the new interactive apps 
designed to support the learning of mathematics (Experiment 2) and reading 
(Experiment 3). When implemented at the start of primary education, before 
significant gender discrepancies become established, this novel technology-based 
intervention can prevent significant gender effects for mathematics. These 
results demonstrate that different instructional practices influence the 
emergence of gender disparities in early mathematics. Digital interventions can 
mitigate gender differences in countries where standard pedagogical instruction 
typically hinders girls from acquiring early mathematical skills at the same 
rate as boys. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=55x-6hhAY9M&feature=youtu.be.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12864
PMCID: PMC6771718
PMID: 31120168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest with 
the work reported in this article. The work was carried out in the absence of 
any personal, professional or financial relationships that could potentially be 
construed as a conflict of interest.


190. Dev Sci. 2020 May;23(3):e12918. doi: 10.1111/desc.12918. Epub 2019 Nov 26.

Common mechanisms of executive attention underlie executive function and 
effortful control in children.

Tiego J(1)(2), Bellgrove MA(1), Whittle S(2)(3), Pantelis C(3)(4), Testa 
R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Turner Institute for Brain and Mental Health and School of Psychological 
Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Melbourne Neuropsychiatry Centre, The University of 
Melbourne and Melbourne Health, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Melbourne School of Psychological Sciences, The University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(4)Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Centre for Neural 
Engineering, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Executive Function (EF) and Effortful Control (EC) have traditionally been 
viewed as distinct constructs related to cognition and temperament during 
development. More recently, EF and EC have been implicated in top-down 
self-regulation - the goal-directed control of cognition, emotion, and behavior. 
We propose that executive attention, a limited-capacity attentional resource 
subserving goal-directed cognition and behavior, is the common cognitive 
mechanism underlying the self-regulatory capacities captured by EF and EC. We 
addressed three related questions: (a) Do behavioral ratings of EF and EC 
represent the same self-regulation construct? (b) Is this self-regulation 
construct explained by a common executive attention factor as measured by 
performance on cognitive tasks? and (c) Does the executive attention factor 
explain additional variance in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
problems to behavioral ratings of self-regulation? Measures of performance on 
complex span, general intelligence, and response inhibition tasks were obtained 
from 136 preadolescent children (M = 11 years, 10 months, SD = 8 months), along 
with self- and parent-reported EC, and parent-reported EF, and ADHD problems. 
Results from structural equation modeling demonstrated that behavioral ratings 
of EF and EC measured the same self-regulation construct. Cognitive tasks 
measured a common executive attention factor that significantly explained 30% of 
the variance in behavioral ratings of self-regulation. Executive attention 
failed to significantly explain additional variance in ADHD problems beyond that 
explained by behavioral ratings of self-regulation. These findings raise 
questions about the utility of task-based cognitive measures in research and 
clinical assessment of self-regulation and psychopathology in developmental 
samples.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12918
PMID: 31680377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12938. doi: 10.1111/desc.12938. Epub 2020 Feb 26.

"I don't know but I know who to ask": 12-month-olds actively seek information 
from knowledgeable adults.

Bazhydai M(1), Westermann G(1), Parise E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Fylde College, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK.

Active social communication is an effective way for infants to learn about the 
world. Do pre-verbal and pre-pointing infants seek epistemic information from 
their social partners when motivated to obtain information they cannot discover 
independently? The present study investigated whether 12-month-olds (N = 30) 
selectively seek information from knowledgeable adults in situations of 
referential uncertainty. In a live experiment, infants were introduced to two 
unfamiliar adults, an Informant (reliably labeling objects) and a Non-Informant 
(equally socially engaging, but ignorant about object labels). At test, infants 
were asked to make an impossible choice-locate a novel referent among two novel 
objects. When facing epistemic uncertainty-but not at other phases of the 
procedure-infants selectively referred to the Informant rather than the 
Non-Informant. These results show that pre-verbal infants use social referencing 
to actively and selectively seek information from social partners as part of 
their interrogative communicative toolkit. A video abstract of this article can 
be viewed at https://youtu.be/23dLPsa-fAY.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12938
PMID: 31954092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Dev Sci. 2020 Jan;23(1):e12856. doi: 10.1111/desc.12856. Epub 2019 Jun 28.

Out of mind, out of sight? Investigating abnormal face scanning in autism 
spectrum disorder using gaze-contingent paradigm.

Wang Q(1), Hoi SP(2), Wang Y(3), Song C(2), Li T(2), Lam CM(4), Fang 
F(1)(2)(5)(6), Yi L(2).

Author information:
(1)Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Academy for Advanced 
Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, Beijing, China.
(2)School of Psychological and Cognitive Science & Beijing Key Laboratory of 
Behavior and Mental Health, Peking University, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Psychology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (Ministry of Education), Peking 
University, Beijing, China.
(6)PKU-IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Peking University, Beijing, 
China.

Diminished social motivation is hypothesized to explain abnormal face scanning 
pattern in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), especially reduced 
eye-looking time in ASDs than typically developing (TD) people. Here, we tested 
an alternative explanation that children with ASD may use a compensatory 
strategy to avoid direct eye contact by processing the eyes through peripheral 
vision. We compared the face scanning patterns of children with and without ASD 
in two conditions: in the clear condition, the face was completely visible; in 
the blur condition, by using the gaze-contingent paradigm, the whole face was 
blurred except for a small region being fixated at, thus children could not rely 
on the peripheral information to process the eyes. We found that children with 
ASD fixated less on the eyes than TD children in both conditions. 
Temporal-course analyses further revealed the possible motivation-based guidance 
of attention to process the eyes in the TD group but not in the ASD group. 
Additionally, we found that children with ASD scanned faces more randomly and 
less strategically than TD children. These results have ruled out the 
alternative hypothesis that the abnormal face scanning pattern in ASDs was due 
to their compensatory strategy to process eyes through peripheral vision, 
furthering our understanding of the mechanisms underlying their abnormal face 
scanning.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12856
PMID: 31081980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12629. doi: 10.1111/desc.12629. Epub 2017 Oct 26.

Curiosity-based learning in infants: a neurocomputational approach.

Twomey KE(1), Westermann G(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Communication, Development and Hearing, School of Health 
Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Lancaster, Lancaster, UK.

Infants are curious learners who drive their own cognitive development by 
imposing structure on their learning environment as they explore. Understanding 
the mechanisms by which infants structure their own learning is therefore 
critical to our understanding of development. Here we propose an explicit 
mechanism for intrinsically motivated information selection that maximizes 
learning. We first present a neurocomputational model of infant visual category 
learning, capturing existing empirical data on the role of environmental 
complexity on learning. Next we "set the model free", allowing it to select its 
own stimuli based on a formalization of curiosity and three alternative 
selection mechanisms. We demonstrate that maximal learning emerges when the 
model is able to maximize stimulus novelty relative to its internal states, 
depending on the interaction across learning between the structure of the 
environment and the plasticity in the learner itself. We discuss the 
implications of this new curiosity mechanism for both existing computational 
models of reinforcement learning and for our understanding of this fundamental 
mechanism in early development.

© 2017 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12629
PMCID: PMC6032944
PMID: 29071759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Dev Sci. 2020 Dec 20:e13077. doi: 10.1111/desc.13077. Online ahead of print.

Anticipating future actions: Motor planning improves with age in wild bearded 
capuchin monkeys (Sapajus libidinosus).

Truppa V(1), Sabbatini G(1), Izar P(2), Fragaszy DM(3), Visalberghi E(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, National Research Council 
(CNR), Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, 
Brazil.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA.

Self-directed object manipulation tasks illuminate development of motor 
planning. Grasping strategies that lead to good object control to perform the 
following action(s) reveal second-order motor planning. Motor planning for 
efficient grips develops slowly in children. Age-related differences in other 
primates have been poorly investigated. Here, we investigated anticipatory motor 
planning of infant, juvenile and adult wild capuchin monkeys grasping a 
horizontally positioned stick baited to the left or right side (a version of the 
elevated spoon task). We recorded the grasps capuchins used to bring the baited 
end of the stick to the mouth. The percentage of efficient radial grips 
positively correlated with age and adults used efficient grips significantly 
more frequently than infants. Adult wild capuchins' use of radial grips was 
higher than that reported for adult captive capuchins in similar tasks, 
suggesting that experience throughout life may influence motor anticipation. 
Self-directed object manipulation tasks will be useful to compare this aspect of 
cognition across primates. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at 
https://youtu.be/a1Zbr_AQkb8.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13077
PMID: 33342007


195. Dev Sci. 2020 Jan;23(1):e12857. doi: 10.1111/desc.12857. Epub 2019 Jun 21.

Brain activity patterns of phonemic representations are atypical in beginning 
readers with family risk for dyslexia.

Vandermosten M(1)(2), Correia J(2)(3), Vanderauwera J(1)(4), Wouters J(1), 
Ghesquière P(4), Bonte M(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Group ExpORL, Department of Neuroscience, KU Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium.
(2)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience and Maastricht Brain Imaging Center, 
Faculty of Psychology and Neuroscience, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language, San Sebastian, Spain.
(4)Parenting and Special Education Research Unit, Faculty of Psychology and 
Educational Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

There is an ongoing debate whether phonological deficits in dyslexics should be 
attributed to (a) less specified representations of speech sounds, like 
suggested by studies in young children with a familial risk for dyslexia, or (b) 
to an impaired access to these phonemic representations, as suggested by studies 
in adults with dyslexia. These conflicting findings are rooted in between study 
differences in sample characteristics and/or testing techniques. The current 
study uses the same multivariate functional MRI (fMRI) approach as previously 
used in adults with dyslexia to investigate phonemic representations in 30 
beginning readers with a familial risk and 24 beginning readers without a 
familial risk of dyslexia, of whom 20 were later retrospectively classified as 
dyslexic. Based on fMRI response patterns evoked by listening to different 
utterances of /bA/ and /dA/ sounds, multivoxel analyses indicate that the 
underlying activation patterns of the two phonemes were distinct in children 
with a low family risk but not in children with high family risk. However, no 
group differences were observed between children that were later classified as 
typical versus dyslexic readers, regardless of their family risk status, 
indicating that poor phonemic representations constitute a risk for dyslexia but 
are not sufficient to result in reading problems. We hypothesize that poor 
phonemic representations are trait (family risk) and not state (dyslexia) 
dependent, and that representational deficits only lead to reading difficulties 
when they are present in conjunction with other neuroanatomical or-functional 
deficits.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12857
PMID: 31090993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Dev Sci. 2020 Jan;23(1):e12862. doi: 10.1111/desc.12862. Epub 2019 Jun 14.

The ontogeny of cumulative culture: Individual toddlers vary in faithful 
imitation and goal emulation.

Yu Y(1), Kushnir T(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Research in Child Development, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore.
(2)Department of Human Development, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York.

The success of human culture depends on early emerging mechanisms of social 
learning, which include the ability to acquire opaque cultural knowledge through 
faithful imitation, as well as the ability to advance culture through flexible 
discovery of new means to goal attainment. This study explores whether this 
mixture of faithful imitation and goal emulation is based in part on individual 
differences which emerge early in ontogeny. Experimental measurements and 
parental reports were collected for a group of 2-year-old children (N = 48, 
age = 23-32 months) on their imitative behavior as well as other aspects of 
cognitive and social development. Results revealed individual differences in 
children's imitative behavior across trials and tasks which were best 
characterized by a model that included two behavioral routines; one 
corresponding to faithful imitation, and one to goal emulation. Moreover, 
individual differences in faithful imitation and goal emulation were correlated 
with individual differences in theory of mind, prosocial behavior, and 
temperament. These findings were discussed in terms of their implications for 
understanding the mechanisms of social learning, ontogeny of cumulative culture, 
and the benefit of analyzing individual differences for developmental 
experiments.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12862
PMID: 31111632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12947. doi: 10.1111/desc.12947. Epub 2020 Mar 3.

Development of neural oscillatory activity in response to speech in children 
from 4 to 6 years old.

Ríos-López P(1), Molinaro N(1)(2), Bourguignon M(1)(3), Lallier M(1).

Author information:
(1)BCBL - Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language, Donostia/San 
Sebastian, Spain.
(2)Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain.
(3)Laboratoire de Cartographie fonctionnelle du Cerveau, Universite libre de 
Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.

Recent neurophysiological theories propose that the cerebral hemispheres 
collaborate to resolve the complex temporal nature of speech, such that 
left-hemisphere (or bilateral) gamma-band oscillatory activity would specialize 
in coding information at fast rates (phonemic information), whereas 
right-hemisphere delta- and theta-band activity would code for speech's slow 
temporal components (syllabic and prosodic information). Despite the relevance 
that neural entrainment to speech might have for reading acquisition and for 
core speech perception operations such as the perception of intelligible speech, 
no study had yet explored its development in young children. In the current 
study, speech-brain entrainment was recorded via EEG in a cohort of children at 
three different time points since they were 4-5 to 6-7 years of age. Our results 
showed that speech-brain entrainment occurred only at delta frequencies (0.5 Hz) 
at all testing times. The fact that, from the longitudinal perspective, 
coherence increased in bilateral temporal electrodes suggests that, contrary to 
previous hypotheses claiming for an innate right-hemispheric bias for processing 
prosodic information, at 7 years of age the low-frequency components of speech 
are processed in a bilateral manner. Lastly, delta speech-brain entrainment in 
the right hemisphere was related to an indirect measure of intelligibility, 
providing preliminary evidence that the entrainment phenomenon might support 
core linguistic operations since early childhood.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12947
PMCID: PMC7685108
PMID: 32043677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


198. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov 9:e13062. doi: 10.1111/desc.13062. Online ahead of print.

Climbing up or falling down: Narcissism predicts physiological sensitivity to 
social status in children and their parents.

Grapsas S(1), Denissen JJA(1)(2), Lee HY(3), Bos PA(4), Brummelman E(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Psychology, Tilburg University, Tilburg, the 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Developmental Psychology, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(4)Institute of Education and Child Studies, Leiden University, Leiden, the 
Netherlands.
(5)Research Institute of Child Development and Education, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Children's narcissism may be rooted in sensitivity to social status (i.e., 
prominence, respect, and influence in a social group), and this sensitivity 
might be shared with parents. Testing this idea, a randomized experiment 
examined how children with high narcissism levels and their parents respond to 
gains and losses of social status. On a simulated social media platform, 
children (N = 123, ages 8-13) competed with fictitious peers for status and were 
randomly assigned to gain or lose status. Unbeknownst to children, parents 
viewed the course of the task. Children's and parents' affective reactions 
during the task were measured with facial electromyography, which detects 
spontaneous facial muscle activity linked to positive affect (i.e., zygomaticus 
major activity, involved in smiling) and negative affect (i.e., corrugator 
supercilii activity, involved in frowning). Children with higher narcissism 
levels showed steeper increases in negative affect during status loss and 
steeper increases in both positive and negative affect during status gain. Their 
parents mirrored the steeper increase in positive affect during their child's 
status gain, but they did not mirror the increase in negative affect. These 
results suggest that children with high narcissism levels and their parents show 
intensified affective-motivational responses to children's status-relevant 
experiences. These responses may be transmitted from one generation to the other 
(e.g., genetically or through parent-child socialization).

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13062
PMID: 33164282


199. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12798. doi: 10.1111/desc.12798. Epub 2019 Feb 20.

Evaluation and training of Executive Functions in genocide survivors. The case 
of Yazidi children.

Pellizzoni S(1), Apuzzo GM(1), De Vita C(1), Agostini T(1), Passolunghi MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.

Executive Functions (EFs) development is critically affected by stress and 
trauma, as well as the socioeconomic context in which children grow up (Welsh, 
Nix, Blair, Bierman, & Nelson, 2010, Journal of Educational Psychology, 102, 
43-53). Research in this field is surprisingly lacking in relation to war 
contexts. This study represents a first attempt at addressing this topic by 
evaluating EFs in Yazidi children. The Yazidi community is an ethnic and 
religious minority living in Iraq. From August 2014 onwards, the Yazidi 
community has been the target of several atrocities perpetrated by ISIS and 
described as genocide by the international community at large. The University of 
Trieste, thanks to a program financed by the Friuli Venezia Giulia Region, 
developed a study aimed at (a) evaluating hot and cool EFs in children living in 
a war context and (b) developing a specific training method to enhance hot and 
cool EFs in Yazidi children of preschool age (N = 53). Data related to this 
group of children were compared with a sample of typically developing Italian 
children randomly assigned to either an EFs training group (N = 55) or a passive 
control group (N = 51). Results indicate different baselines in EFs in Yazidi 
and Italian samples and a significant effect of the program on both trained 
groups, especially in tasks measuring hot EFs. Data are discussed in terms of 
hot and cool EFs in children growing in adverse environments, as well as the 
evaluation of educational and developmental opportunities to prevent children 
who survived genocide from becoming a 'lost generation'. A video abstract of 
this article can be viewed at https://youtu.be/7t_08TbxR_8.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12798
PMID: 30620434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Dev Sci. 2020 Mar;23(2):e12879. doi: 10.1111/desc.12879. Epub 2019 Jul 9.

Effects of past language experience and present language context on the shape 
bias in Spanish-English bilingual children.

Schonberg CC(1), Russell EE(2), Luna ML(1).

Author information:
(1)UCLA, Los Angeles, California.
(2)CSUN, Northridge, California.

English-monolingual children develop a shape bias early in language acquisition, 
such that they more often generalize a novel label based on shape than other 
features. Spanish-monolingual children, however, do not show this bias to the 
same extent (Hahn & Cantrell, 2012). Studying children who are simultaneously 
learning both Spanish and English presents a unique opportunity to further 
investigate how this word-learning bias develops. Thus, we asked how 
Spanish-English bilingual children (Mage  = 21.31 months) perform in a 
novel-noun generalization (NNG) task, specifically examining how past language 
experience (i.e. language exposure and vocabulary size) and present language 
context (i.e. whether the NNG task was conducted in Spanish or English) 
influence the strength of the shape bias. Participants completed the NNG task 
either entirely in English (N = 16) or entirely in Spanish (N = 16), as well as 
language understanding tasks in both English and Spanish to ensure that they 
understood what the experimenter was asking them to do. Parents completed a 
language exposure survey and vocabulary checklists in Spanish and English. There 
was a significant interaction between condition and choice type: Bilingual 
children in the English condition showed a shape bias in the NNG task, but 
bilingual children in the Spanish condition showed no reliable biases. No 
measures of past language experience were related to NNG task performance. These 
results suggest that when learning new words, bilingual children are attuned to 
the regularities of the present language context, and prior language experiences 
may play a more secondary role.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12879
PMID: 31180601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Dev Sci. 2020 Jul;23(4):e12870. doi: 10.1111/desc.12870. Epub 2019 Jun 27.

The academic outcomes of working memory and metacognitive strategy training in 
children: A double-blind randomized controlled trial.

Jones JS(1)(2), Milton F(1), Mostazir M(1), Adlam AR(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences, University 
of Exeter, Exeter, UK.
(2)MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
UK.

Working memory training has been shown to improve performance on untrained 
working memory tasks in typically developing children, at least when compared to 
non-adaptive training; however, there is little evidence that it improves 
academic outcomes. The lack of transfer to academic outcomes may be because 
children are only learning skills and strategies in a very narrow context, which 
they are unable to apply to other tasks. Metacognitive strategy interventions, 
which promote metacognitive awareness and teach children general strategies that 
can be used on a variety of tasks, may be a crucial missing link in this regard. 
In this double-blind randomized controlled trial, 95 typically developing 
children aged 9-14 years were allocated to three cognitive training programmes 
that were conducted daily after-school. One group received Cogmed working memory 
training, another group received concurrent Cogmed and metacognitive strategy 
training, and the control group received adaptive visual search training, which 
better controls for expectancy and motivation than non-adaptive training. 
Children were assessed on four working memory tasks, reading comprehension, and 
mathematical reasoning before, immediately after, and 3 months after training. 
Working memory training improved working memory and mathematical reasoning 
relative to the control group. The improvements in working memory were 
maintained 3 months later, and these were significantly greater for the group 
that received metacognitive strategy training, compared to working memory 
training alone. Working memory training is a potentially effective educational 
intervention when provided in addition to school; however, future research will 
need to investigate ways to maintain academic improvements long term and to 
optimize metacognitive strategy training to promote far-transfer. A video 
abstract of this article can be viewed at https://youtu.be/-7MML48ZFgw.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12870
PMCID: PMC7379186
PMID: 31134713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest.


202. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e12986. doi: 10.1111/desc.12986. Epub 2020 Jun 28.

Dynamic relationships between phonological memory and reading: A five year 
longitudinal study from age 4 to 9.

Cunningham AJ(1)(2), Burgess AP(1)(3), Witton C(1)(3), Talcott JB(1)(2), Shapiro 
LR(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Life and Health Sciences, Psychology, Aston University, Birmingham, 
UK.
(2)School of Social Sciences, Psychology, Nottingham Trent University, 
Nottingham, UK.
(3)Aston Neuroscience Institute, Aston University, Birmingham, UK.

We reconcile competing theories of the role of phonological memory in reading 
development, by uncovering their dynamic relationship during the first 5 years 
of school. Phonological memory, reading and phoneme awareness were assessed in 
780 phonics-educated children at age 4, 5, 6 and 9. Confirmatory factor analyses 
demonstrated that phonological memory loaded onto two factors: verbal short-term 
memory (verbal STM; phonological tasks that loaded primarily on serial order 
memory) and nonword repetition. Using longitudinal structural equation models, 
we found that verbal STM directly predicted early word-level reading from age 4 
to 6, reflecting the importance of serial-order memory for letter-by-letter 
decoding. In contrast, reading had no reciprocal influence on the development of 
verbal STM. The relationship between nonword repetition and reading was 
bidirectional across the 5 years of study: nonword repetition and reading 
predicted each other both directly and indirectly (via phoneme awareness). 
Indirect effects from nonword repetition (and verbal STM) to reading support the 
view that phonological memory stimulates phonemically detailed representations 
through repeated encoding of complex verbal stimuli. Similarly, the indirect 
influence of reading on nonword repetition suggests that improved reading 
ability promotes the phoneme-level specificity of phonological representations. 
Finally, the direct influence from reading to nonword repetition suggests that 
better readers use orthographic cues to help them remember and repeat new words 
accurately. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=70LZfTR0BjE.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12986
PMID: 32412095


203. Dev Sci. 2020 Jul;23(4):e12898. doi: 10.1111/desc.12898. Epub 2019 Sep 18.

Complex and subtle structural changes in prefrontal cortex induced by inhibitory 
control training from childhood to adolescence.

Delalande L(1), Moyon M(1), Tissier C(1)(2), Dorriere V(1), Guillois B(3), 
Mevell K(1), Charron S(1)(2), Salvia E(1), Poirel N(1), Vidal J(1), Lion S(2), 
Oppenheim C(2), Houdé O(1)(4), Cachia A(1)(2)(4), Borst G(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Université de Paris, LaPsyDÉ, CNRS, Paris, France.
(2)Biomarkers of Brain Development and Disorders, Institute of Psychiatry and 
Neuroscience of Paris, INSERM UMR894, Paris, France.
(3)Hôpital Clemenceau, CHU de Caen, Caen, France.
(4)Institut Universitaire de France, Paris, France.

A number of training interventions have been designed to improve executive 
functions and inhibitory control (IC) across the lifespan. Surprisingly, no 
study has investigated the structural neuroplasticity induced by IC training 
from childhood to late adolescence, a developmental period characterized by IC 
efficiency improvement and protracted maturation of prefrontal cortex (PFC) 
subregions involved in IC. The aim of the present study was to investigate the 
behavioral and structural changes induced by a 5-week computerized and adaptive 
IC training in school-aged children (10-year-olds) and in adolescents 
(16-year-olds). Sixty-four children and 59 adolescents were randomly assigned to 
an IC (i.e. Color-Word Stroop and Stop-Signal tasks) or an active control (AC) 
(knowledge- and vocabulary-based tasks) training group. In the pre- and 
posttraining sessions, participants performed the Color-Word Stroop and 
Stop-signal tasks, and an anatomical resonance imaging (MRI) was acquired for 
each of them. Children's IC efficiency improved from the pre- to the 
posttraining session in boys but not in girls. In adolescents, IC efficiency did 
not improve after IC training. Similar to the neuroplastic mechanisms observed 
during brain maturation, we observed IC training-related changes in cortical 
thickness and cortical surface area in several PFC subregions (e.g. the pars 
opercularis, triangularis, and orbitalis of the inferior frontal gyri) that were 
age- and gender-specific. Because no correction for multiple comparisons was 
applied, the results of our study provide only preliminary evidence of the 
complex structural neuroplastic mechanisms at the root of behavioral changes in 
IC efficiency from pre- to posttraining in school-aged children and adolescents.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12898
PMID: 31469938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Dev Sci. 2020 Jul;23(4):e12866. doi: 10.1111/desc.12866. Epub 2019 Jun 26.

Effects of game-based and standard executive control training on cognitive and 
academic abilities in elementary school children.

Johann VE(1)(2), Karbach J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Koblenz-Landau, Landau in der Pfalz, 
Germany.
(2)Center for Research on Individual Development and Adaptive Education of 
Children at Risk (IDeA), Frankfurt, Germany.

Several studies indicate that executive functions (EF), such as working memory 
(WM), inhibition or flexibility can be improved by training and that these 
training-related benefits in WM capacity generalize to reading and mathematical 
abilities. However, the results of these studies are inconsistent and most of 
them focused on WM training in children with learning difficulties. Evidence for 
typically developing children is rare and no study has investigated inhibition 
training or flexibility training. There is also a lack of studies taking 
motivational factors into account. Therefore, this study compared the effects of 
game-based and standard training regimens targeting WM, inhibition, or 
flexibility in children. One hundred and fifty-three typically developing 
elementary school students (mean age = 9.6 years, standard deviations  = 0.8) 
were investigated in an intervention design with a pretest, 21 sessions of 
training, a posttest and a follow-up after three months. They were randomized 
into one of six training groups or a control group. We found training gains in 
all training groups and higher self-reported motivation in the game-based as 
compared to the standard training groups. Furthermore, there was domain-specific 
transfer to untrained EF tasks across all training groups. We found greater 
performance improvements in reading ability (but not mathematics) in the 
game-based flexibility training group and the game-based inhibition training 
group as compared to the control group. Transfer effects were still significant 
at follow-up. In sum, our findings provide first evidence for a systematic 
comparison of training on different domains of EF and their differential effects 
on academic abilities.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12866
PMID: 31132209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12956. doi: 10.1111/desc.12956. Epub 2020 Mar 17.

Neurofeedback trains a superordinate system relevant for seemingly opposing 
behavioral control deficits depending on ADHD subtype.

Bluschke A(1), Schreiter ML(1), Friedrich J(1), Adelhöfer N(1), Roessner V(1), 
Beste C(1).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neurophysiology, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
Faculty of Medicine of the TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany.

ADHD is one of the most prevalent neuropsychiatric disorders of childhood, but 
symptoms vary considerably between individuals. Therefore, different ADHD 
subtypes can be distinguished. Yet, it is widely elusive whether the specific 
subtype is critical to consider when examining treatment effects. Based on 
theoretical considerations, this could be the case for EEG theta/beta 
neurofeedback. We examine the effects of such an intervention on rapid response 
execution and inhibition processes using a Go/Nogo task in the inattentive (ADD) 
and the combined (ADHD-C) subtype. We show that a single neurofeedback protocol 
affects opposing deficits depending on the ADHD subtype - namely the execution 
(in ADD) and inhibition of action (in ADHD-C). No changes occurred in the 
healthy controls. These findings are discussed in relation to overarching 
principles of neural oscillations, particularly in the beta frequency band. The 
data suggest that theta/beta neurofeedback trains a superordinate system 
strongly related to the function of neural beta frequency oscillations to tune 
neural networks important for the sampling of sensory information used for 
behavioral control.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12956
PMID: 32107844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12727. doi: 10.1111/desc.12727. Epub 2018 Sep 24.

Selective attention, filtering, and the development of working memory.

Plebanek DJ(1), Sloutsky VM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University 
Bloomington, Bloomington, Indiana.
(2)Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.

Selective attention is fundamental for learning across many situations, yet it 
exhibits protracted development, with young children often failing to filter out 
distractors. In this research, we examine links between selective attention and 
working memory (WM) capacity across development. One possibility is that WM is 
resource-limited, with development resulting in an increase in the amount of 
resources available for processing information. However, it is also possible 
that development results in greater efficiency of using available resources. In 
the current research, we explore the latter possibility by examining the 
developmental trajectory of selectivity and filtering in relation to WM 
capacity. We report that filtering efficiency of adults (N = 30), 7-year-olds 
(N = 29), and 4-year-olds (N = 28) was uniquely predictive of WM capacity. We 
also report that filtering efficiency continues to develop after 7 years of age, 
whereas WM capacity may reach an asymptote around 7 years of age. The latter 
finding suggests that selective attention plays a critical role in developmental 
and individual differences in visual working memory capacity.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12727
PMID: 30246908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Dev Sci. 2020 May;23(3):e12912. doi: 10.1111/desc.12912. Epub 2019 Oct 31.

Young children combine sensory cues with learned information in a statistically 
efficient manner: But task complexity matters.

Bejjanki VR(1)(2), Randrup ER(1), Aslin RN(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Hamilton College, Clinton, NY, USA.
(2)Program in Neuroscience, Hamilton College, Clinton, NY, USA.
(3)Haskins Laboratories, New Haven, CT, USA.

Human adults are adept at mitigating the influence of sensory uncertainty on 
task performance by integrating sensory cues with learned prior information, in 
a Bayes-optimal fashion. Previous research has shown that young children and 
infants are sensitive to environmental regularities, and that the ability to 
learn and use such regularities is involved in the development of several 
cognitive abilities. However, it has also been reported that children younger 
than 8 do not combine simultaneously available sensory cues in a Bayes-optimal 
fashion. Thus, it remains unclear whether, and by what age, children can combine 
sensory cues with learned regularities in an adult manner. Here, we examine the 
performance of 6- to 7-year-old children when tasked with localizing a 'hidden' 
target by combining uncertain sensory information with prior information learned 
over repeated exposure to the task. We demonstrate that 6- to 7-year-olds learn 
task-relevant statistics at a rate on par with adults, and like adults, are 
capable of integrating learned regularities with sensory information in a 
statistically efficient manner. We also show that variables such as task 
complexity can influence young children's behavior to a greater extent than that 
of adults, leading their behavior to look sub-optimal. Our findings have 
important implications for how we should interpret failures in young children's 
ability to carry out sophisticated computations. These 'failures' need not be 
attributed to deficits in the fundamental computational capacity available to 
children early in development, but rather to ancillary immaturities in general 
cognitive abilities that mask the operation of these computations in specific 
situations.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12912
PMCID: PMC7153990
PMID: 31608526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.


208. Dev Sci. 2019 Mar;22(2):e12740. doi: 10.1111/desc.12740. Epub 2018 Oct 8.

It's the journey, not the destination: Locomotor exploration in infants.

Hoch JE(1), O'Grady SM(1), Adolph KE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, New York University, New York City, New York.

What incites infant locomotion? Recent research suggests that locomotor 
exploration is not primarily directed toward distant people, places, or things. 
However, this question has not been addressed experimentally. In the current 
study, we asked whether a room filled with toys designed to encourage locomotion 
(stroller, ball, etc.) elicits different quantities or patterns of exploration 
than a room with no toys. Caregivers were present but did not interact with 
infants. Although most walking bouts in the toy-filled room involved toys, to 
our surprise, 15-month-olds in both rooms produced the same quantity of 
locomotion. This finding suggests that mere space to move is sufficient to 
elicit locomotion. However, infants' patterns of locomotor exploration differed: 
Infants in the toy-filled room spent a smaller percent of the session within 
arms' reach of their caregiver and explored more locations in the room. 
Real-time analyses show that infants in the toy-filled room took an increasing 
number of steps per bout and covered more area as the session continued, whereas 
infants in the no-toy room took fewer and fewer steps per bout and traveled 
repeatedly over the same ground. Although not required to elicit locomotion, 
moving with toys encouraged infants to travel farther from their caregivers and 
to explore new areas.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12740
PMCID: PMC6391171
PMID: 30176103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Dev Sci. 2020 May;23(3):e12914. doi: 10.1111/desc.12914. Epub 2019 Nov 15.

The right hemispheric dominance for face perception in preschool children 
depends on the visual discrimination level.

Lochy A(1), Schiltz C(1), Rossion B(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Science and Assessment Institute, Education, Culture, Cognition, 
and Society Research Unit, University of Luxemburg, Esch-sur Alzette, 
Luxembourg.
(2)IPSY, Université Catholique de Louvain, Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium.
(3)CNRS, CRAN, Université de Lorraine, Nancy, France.
(4)CHRU-Nancy, Université de Lorraine, Nancy, France.

The developmental origin of human adults' right hemispheric dominance in 
response to face stimuli remains unclear, in particular because young infants' 
right hemispheric advantage in face-selective response is no longer present in 
preschool children, before written language acquisition. Here we used fast 
periodic visual stimulation (FPVS) with scalp electroencephalography (EEG) to 
test 52 preschool children (5.5 years old) at two different levels of face 
discrimination: discrimination of faces against objects, measuring 
face-selectivity, or discrimination between individual faces. While the contrast 
between faces and nonface objects elicits strictly bilateral occipital responses 
in children, strengthening previous observations, discrimination of individual 
faces in the same children reveals a strong right hemispheric lateralization 
over the occipitotemporal cortex. Picture-plane inversion of the face stimuli 
significantly decreases the individual discrimination response, although to a 
much smaller extent than in older children and adults tested with the same 
paradigm. However, there is only a nonsignificant trend for a decrease in right 
hemispheric lateralization with inversion. There is no relationship between the 
right hemispheric lateralization in individual face discrimination and preschool 
levels of readings abilities. The observed difference in the right hemispheric 
lateralization obtained in the same population of children with two different 
paradigms measuring neural responses to faces indicates that the level of visual 
discrimination is a key factor to consider when making inferences about the 
development of hemispheric lateralization of face perception in the human brain.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12914
PMCID: PMC7379294
PMID: 31618490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.


210. Dev Sci. 2019 Nov;22(6):e12812. doi: 10.1111/desc.12812. Epub 2019 Mar 10.

Parental coping socialization is associated with healthy and anxious 
early-adolescents' neural and real-world response to threat.

Butterfield RD(1), Siegle GJ(2), Lee KH(1), Ladouceur CD(2), Forbes EE(2), Dahl 
RE(3), Ryan ND(2), Sheeber L(4), Silk JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(3)School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, California.
(4)Oregon Research Institute, Eugene, Oregon.

The ways parents socialize their adolescents to cope with anxiety (i.e., coping 
socialization) may be instrumental in the development of threat processing and 
coping responses. Coping socialization may be important for anxious adolescents, 
as they show altered neural threat processing and over reliance on disengaged 
coping (e.g., avoidance and distraction), which can maintain anxiety. We 
investigated whether coping socialization was associated with anxious and 
healthy adolescents' neural response to threat, and whether neural activation 
was associated with disengaged coping. Healthy and clinically anxious early 
adolescents (N = 120; M = 11.46 years; 71 girls) and a parent engaged in 
interactions designed to elicit adolescents' anxiety and parents' response to 
adolescents' anxiety. Parents' use of reframing and problem solving statements 
was coded to measure coping socialization. In a subsequent visit, we assessed 
adolescents' neural response to threat words during a neuroimaging task. 
Adolescents' disengaged coping was measured using ecological momentary 
assessment. Greater coping socialization was associated with lower anterior 
insula and perigenual cingulate activation in healthy adolescents and higher 
activation in anxious adolescents. Coping socialization was indirectly 
associated with less disengaged coping for anxious adolescents through neural 
activation. Findings suggest that associations between coping socialization and 
early adolescents' neural response to threat differ depending on clinical status 
and have implications for anxious adolescents' coping.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12812
PMID: 30746855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Dev Sci. 2020 Dec 24:e13078. doi: 10.1111/desc.13078. Online ahead of print.

Lack of neural evidence for implicit language learning in 9-month-old infants at 
high risk for autism.

Liu J(1)(2)(3), Tsang T(2)(3)(4), Ponting C(3)(4)(5), Jackson L(2)(3)(5), Jeste 
SS(2)(5), Bookheimer SY(2)(5), Dapretto M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, University of California, Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Ahmanson-Lovelace Brain Mapping Center, University of California, Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(5)Semel Institute of Neuroscience and Human Behavior, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Word segmentation is a fundamental aspect of language learning, since 
identification of word boundaries in continuous speech must occur before the 
acquisition of word meanings can take place. We previously used functional 
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to show that youth with autism spectrum 
disorder (ASD) are less sensitive to statistical and speech cues that guide 
implicit word segmentation. However, little is known about the neural mechanisms 
underlying this process during infancy and how this may be associated with ASD 
risk. Here, we examined early neural signatures of language-related learning in 
9-month-old infants at high (HR) and low familial risk (LR) for ASD. During 
natural sleep, infants underwent fMRI while passively listening to three speech 
streams containing strong statistical and prosodic cues, strong statistical cues 
only, or minimal statistical cues to word boundaries. Compared to HR infants, LR 
infants showed greater activity in the left amygdala for the speech stream 
containing statistical and prosodic cues. While listening to this same speech 
stream, LR infants also showed more learning-related signal increases in left 
temporal regions as well as increasing functional connectivity between bilateral 
primary auditory cortex and right anterior insula. Importantly, learning-related 
signal increases at 9 months positively correlated with expressive language 
outcome at 36 months in both groups. In the HR group, greater signal increases 
were additionally associated with less severe ASD symptomatology at 36 months. 
These findings suggest that early differences in the neural networks underlying 
language learning may predict subsequent language development and altered 
trajectories associated with ASD risk.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13078
PMID: 33368921


212. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e12983. doi: 10.1111/desc.12983. Epub 2020 May 21.

Multifactorial pathways facilitate resilience among kindergarteners at risk for 
dyslexia: A longitudinal behavioral and neuroimaging study.

Zuk J(1)(2)(3), Dunstan J(1), Norton E(4), Yu X(1)(2)(5), Ozernov-Palchik O(6), 
Wang Y(7), Hogan TP(3), Gabrieli JDE(6), Gaab N(1)(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)Laboratories of Cognitive Neuroscience, Division of Developmental Medicine, 
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, MGH Institute of Health 
Professions, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northwestern University, 
Evanston, IL, USA.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal 
University, Beijing, China.
(6)McGovern Institute for Brain Research and Department of Brain and Cognitive 
Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Special Education and Communication Disorders, University of 
Nebraska - Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA.
(8)Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Recent efforts have focused on screening methods to identify children at risk 
for dyslexia as early as preschool/kindergarten. Unfortunately, while low 
sensitivity leads to under-identification of at-risk children, low specificity 
can lead to over-identification, resulting in inaccurate allocation of limited 
educational resources. The present study focused on children identified as 
at-risk in kindergarten who do not subsequently develop poor reading skills to 
specify factors associated with better reading outcomes among at-risk children. 
Early screening was conducted in kindergarten and a subset of children was 
tracked longitudinally until second grade. Potential protective factors were 
evaluated at cognitive-linguistic, environmental, and neural levels. Relative to 
at-risk kindergarteners with subsequent poor reading, those with typical reading 
outcomes were characterized by significantly higher socioeconomic status (SES), 
speech production accuracy, and structural organization of the posterior 
right-hemispheric superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF). A positive association 
between structural organization of the right SLF and subsequent decoding skills 
was found to be specific to at-risk children and not observed among typical 
controls. Among at-risk children, several kindergarten-age factors were found to 
significantly contribute to the prediction of subsequent decoding skills: white 
matter organization in the posterior right SLF, age, gender, SES, and 
phonological awareness. These findings suggest that putative compensatory 
mechanisms are already present by the start of kindergarten. The right SLF, in 
conjunction with the cognitive-linguistic and socioeconomic factors identified, 
may play an important role in facilitating reading development among at-risk 
children. This study has important implications for approaches to early 
screening, and assessment strategies for at-risk children.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12983
PMCID: PMC7606625
PMID: 32356911

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLIC T OF INTEREST The author(s) declare no 
conflicts of interest.


213. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e13009. doi: 10.1111/desc.13009. Epub 2020 Jul 13.

Procedural learning and retention of audio-verbal temporal sequence is altered 
in children with developmental coordination disorder but cortical thickness 
matters.

Lê M(1), Blais M(1), Jucla M(2), Chauveau N(1), Maziero S(1)(2), Biotteau M(1), 
Albaret JM(1), Péran P(1), Chaix Y(1)(3), Tallet J(1).

Author information:
(1)ToNIC, Toulouse NeuroImaging Center, Université de Toulouse, Inserm, UPS, 
Toulouse, France.
(2)Octogone-Lordat, University of Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(3)Hôpital des Enfants Universitaire de Toulouse, CHU Purpan Toulouse, 
Midi-Pyrénées, France.

Rhythmic abilities are impaired in developmental coordination disorder (DCD) but 
learning deficit of procedural skills implying temporal sequence is still 
unclear. Current contradictory results suggest that procedural learning deficits 
in DCD highly depend on learning conditions. The present study proposes to test 
the role of sensory modality of stimulations (visual or auditory) on 
synchronization, learning, and retention of temporal verbal sequences in 
children with and without DCD. We postulated a deficit in learning particularly 
with auditory stimulations, in association with atypical cortical thickness of 
three regions of interesting: sensorimotor, frontal and parietal regions. Thirty 
children with and without DCD (a) performed a synchronization task to a regular 
temporal sequence and (b) practiced and recalled a novel non-regular temporal 
sequences with auditory and visual modalities. They also had a magnetic 
resonance imaging to measure their cortical thickness. Results suggested that 
children with DCD presented a general deficit in synchronization of a regular 
temporal verbal sequence irrespective of the sensory modality, but a specific 
deficit in learning and retention of auditory non-regular verbal temporal 
sequence. Stability of audio-verbal synchronization during practice correlated 
with cortical thickness of the sensorimotor cortex. For the first time, our 
results suggest that synchronization deficits in DCD are not limited to manual 
tasks. This deficit persists despite repeated exposition and practice of an 
auditory temporal sequence, which suggests a possible alteration in audio-verbal 
coupling in DCD. On the contrary, control of temporal parameters with visual 
stimuli seems to be less affected, which opens perspectives for clinical 
practice.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13009
PMID: 32573893


214. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12948. doi: 10.1111/desc.12948. Epub 2020 Mar 20.

Functional near-infrared spectroscopy in toddlers: Neural differentiation of 
communicative cues and relation to future language abilities.

Smith EG(1)(2), Condy E(2), Anderson A(2), Thurm A(3), Manwaring SS(4), 
Swineford L(5), Gandjbakhche A(2), Redcay E(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA.
(2)National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(5)Washington State University, Spokane, WA, USA.

The toddler and preschool years are a time of significant development in both 
expressive and receptive communication abilities. However, little is known about 
the neurobiological underpinnings of language development during this period, 
likely due to difficulties acquiring functional neuroimaging data. Functional 
near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) is a motion-tolerant neuroimaging technique 
that assesses cortical brain activity and can be used in very young children. 
Here, we use fNIRS during perception of communicative and noncommunicative 
speech and gestures in typically developing 2- and 3-year-olds (Study 1, n = 15, 
n = 12 respectively) and in a sample of 2-year-olds with both fNIRS data 
collected at age 2 and language outcome data at age 3 (Study 2, n = 18). In 
Study 1, 2- and 3-year-olds differentiated between communicative and 
noncommunicative stimuli as well as between speech and gestures in the left 
lateral frontal region. However, 2-year-olds showed different patterns of 
activation from 3-year-olds in right medial frontal regions. In Study 2, which 
included two toddlers identified with early language delays along with 16 
typically developing toddlers, neural differentiation of communicative stimuli 
in the right medial frontal region at age 2 predicted receptive language at age 
3. Specifically, after accounting for variance related to verbal ability at age 
2, increased neural activation for communicative gestures (vs. both 
communicative speech and noncommunicative gestures) at age 2 predicted higher 
receptive language scores at age 3. These results are discussed in the context 
of the underlying mechanisms of toddler language development and use of fNIRS in 
prediction of language outcomes.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12948
PMCID: PMC7685129
PMID: 32048419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors have any conflict of 
interest to report related to the completion of this work.


215. Dev Sci. 2019 Nov;22(6):e12804. doi: 10.1111/desc.12804. Epub 2019 Feb 28.

From understanding others' needs to prosocial action: Motor and social abilities 
promote infants' helping.

Köster M(1)(2)(3), Itakura S(3), Omori M(3), Kärtner J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(2)Faculty of Education and Psychology, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, 
Germany.
(3)Department of Psychology, Graduate School of Letters, Kyoto University, 
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

In the present study, we test the main hypothesis that infants' understanding of 
others' needs translates into helping behavior, when critical motor and social 
competencies have emerged, early in the second year. We assessed the 
understanding of others' needs in an eye-tracking paradigm and the helping 
behavior of 10- (n = 41) and 16-month-olds (n = 37). Furthermore, we assessed 
the motor and social abilities of 16-month-olds. Critically, while infants 
understood others' needs already at 10 months, fine motor and social interaction 
skills moderated the link between infants' prosocial understanding and helping 
behavior at 16 months. This provides first evidence that infants' helping 
behavior relates to their understanding of others' needs. Furthermore, we found 
that fine motor, gross motor, and social interaction skills predicted early 
helping behavior by themselves. These findings highlight that the emergence of 
infants' helping behavior is the result of a developmental system that includes 
infants' understanding of others' needs and also their motor and social 
competencies. The link between infants' understanding of others' needs and their 
early helpful actions provide further support for the prosocial nature of early 
helping behavior.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12804
PMID: 30706665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12965. doi: 10.1111/desc.12965. Epub 2020 Apr 27.

Visual experiences during letter production contribute to the development of the 
neural systems supporting letter perception.

Vinci-Booher S(1), James KH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 
Bloomington, IN, USA.

Letter production through handwriting creates visual experiences that may be 
important for the development of visual letter perception. We sought to better 
understand the neural responses to different visual percepts created during 
handwriting at different levels of experience. Three groups of participants, 
younger children, older children, and adults, ranging in age from 4.5 to 
22 years old, were presented with dynamic and static presentations of their own 
handwritten letters, static presentations of an age-matched control's 
handwritten letters, and typeface letters during fMRI. First, data from each 
group were analyzed through a series of contrasts designed to highlight neural 
systems that were most sensitive to each visual experience in each age group. We 
found that younger children recruited ventral-temporal cortex during perception 
and this response was associated with the variability present in handwritten 
forms. Older children and adults also recruited ventral-temporal cortex; this 
response, however, was significant for typed letter forms but not variability. 
The adult response to typed letters was more distributed than in the children, 
including ventral-temporal, parietal, and frontal motor cortices. The adult 
response was also significant for one's own handwritten letters in left parietal 
cortex. Second, we compared responses among age groups. Compared to older 
children, younger children demonstrated a greater fusiform response associated 
with handwritten form variability. When compared to adults, younger children 
demonstrated a greater response to this variability in left parietal cortex. Our 
results suggest that the visual perception of the variability present in 
handwritten forms that occurs during handwriting may contribute to developmental 
changes in the neural systems that support letter perception.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12965
PMID: 32176426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12875. doi: 10.1111/desc.12875. Epub 2019 Jul 28.

Multilingual assessment of early child development: Analyses from repeated 
observations of children in Kenya.

Knauer HA(1), Kariger P(2), Jakiela P(3), Ozier O(4), Fernald LCH(1).

Author information:
(1)Berkeley School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, 
California.
(2)Center for Effective Global Action, University of California, Berkeley, 
California.
(3)Center for Global Development, Washington, District of Columbia.
(4)Human Development Team, The World Bank Development Research Group, 
Washington, District of Columbia.

In many low- and middle-income countries, young children learn a mother tongue 
or indigenous language at home before entering the formal education system where 
they will need to understand and speak a country's official language(s). Thus, 
assessments of children before school age, conducted in a nation's official 
language, may not fully reflect a child's development, underscoring the 
importance of test translation and adaptation. To examine differences in 
vocabulary development by language of assessment, we adapted and validated 
instruments to measure developmental outcomes, including expressive and 
receptive vocabulary. We assessed 505 2-to-6-year-old children in rural 
communities in Western Kenya with comparable vocabulary tests in three 
languages: Luo (the local language or mother tongue), Swahili, and English 
(official languages) at two time points, 5-6 weeks apart, between September 2015 
and October 2016. Younger children responded to the expressive vocabulary 
measure exclusively in Luo (44%-59% of 2-to-4-year-olds) much more frequently 
than did older children (20%-21% of 5-to-6-year-olds). Baseline receptive 
vocabulary scores in Luo (β = 0.26, SE = 0.05, p < 0.001) and Swahili (β = 0.10, 
SE = 0.05, p = 0.032) were strongly associated with receptive vocabulary in 
English at follow-up, even after controlling for English vocabulary at baseline. 
Parental Luo literacy at baseline (β = 0.11, SE = 0.05, p = 0.045) was 
associated with child English vocabulary at follow-up, while parental English 
literacy at baseline was not. Our findings suggest that multilingual testing is 
essential to understanding the developmental environment and cognitive growth of 
multilingual children.

© 2019 The World Bank. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12875
PMCID: PMC6771616
PMID: 31162875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.


218. Dev Sci. 2017 Nov;20(6). doi: 10.1111/desc.12481. Epub 2016 Oct 27.

Malleability of implicit associations across development.

Gonzalez AM(1), Dunlop WL(2), Baron AS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of California, Riverside, USA.

The prevalence of implicit intergroup bias in adults underscores the importance 
of knowing when during development such biases are most amenable to change. 
Although research suggests that implicit intergroup bias undergoes little change 
across development, no studies have directly examined whether developmental 
differences exist in the capacity for novel implicit associations to form or 
change. The present study examined this issue among children ages 5-12. Results 
from over 800 children provided evidence that novel implicit associations formed 
quickly, regardless of child age, association type (evaluative or 
non-evaluative) or the target of the association (social or non-social). 
Moreover, the magnitude of these changes was comparable across conditions. 
Coupled with similar findings among adults, these data underscore the importance 
of first impressions in shaping implicit intergroup bias and provide further 
evidence that the acquisition of implicit associations is governed by a 
domain-general mechanism that may be fully in place by age 5.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12481
PMID: 27785857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12943. doi: 10.1111/desc.12943. Epub 2020 Feb 7.

Do you understand what I want to tell you? Early sensitivity in bilinguals' 
iconic gesture perception and production.

Wermelinger S(1), Gampe A(1), Helbling N(1), Daum MM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.

Previous research has shown differences in monolingual and bilingual 
communication. We explored whether monolingual and bilingual pre-schoolers 
(N = 80) differ in their ability to understand others' iconic gestures (gesture 
perception) and produce intelligible iconic gestures themselves (gesture 
production) and how these two abilities are related to differences in parental 
iconic gesture frequency. In a gesture perception task, the experimenter 
replaced the last word of every sentence with an iconic gesture. The child was 
then asked to choose one of four pictures that matched the gesture as well as 
the sentence. In a gesture production task, children were asked to indicate 
'with their hands' to a deaf puppet which objects to select. Finally, parental 
gesture frequency was measured while parents answered three different questions. 
In the iconic gesture perception task, monolingual and bilingual children did 
not differ. In contrast, bilinguals produced more intelligible gestures than 
their monolingual peers. Finally, bilingual children's parents gestured more 
while they spoke than monolingual children's parents. We suggest that 
bilinguals' heightened sensitivity to their interaction partner supports their 
ability to produce intelligible gestures and results in a bilingual advantage in 
iconic gesture production.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12943
PMID: 31991030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Dev Sci. 2020 Jul;23(4):e12882. doi: 10.1111/desc.12882. Epub 2019 Jul 23.

'MusiMath' and 'Academic Music' - Two music-based intervention programs for 
fractions learning in fourth grade students.

Azaryahu L(1), Courey SJ(2), Elkoshi R(3), Adi-Japha E(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Education, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel.
(2)Graduate School of Education, Touro College, New York, New York.
(3)Faculty of Music Education, Levinsky College of Education, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(4)The Gonda (Goldschmied) Multidisciplinary Brain Research Center, Bar-Ilan 
University, Ramat-Gan, Israel.

Music and mathematics require abstract thinking and using symbolic notations. 
Controversy exists regarding transfer from musical training to math 
achievements. The current study examined the effect of two integrated 
intervention programs representing holistic versus acoustic approaches, on 
fraction knowledge. Three classes of fourth graders attended 12 lessons on 
fractions: One class attended the 'MusiMath' holistic program (n = 30) focusing 
on rhythm within the melody. Another class attended the 'Academic Music' 
acoustic program (Courey et al., Educ Stud Math 81:251, 2012) (n = 25) which 
uses rhythm only. The third class received regular fraction lessons (comparison 
group, n = 22). Students in both music programs learned to write musical notes 
and perform rhythmic patterns through clapping and drumming as part of their 
fraction lessons. They worked toward adding musical notes to produce a number 
(fraction), and created addition/subtraction problems with musical notes. The 
music programs used a 4/4 time signature with whole, half, quarter and eighth 
notes. In the math lessons, the students learned the analogy between musical 
durations and ½, ¼, ⅛ fractions, but also practiced fractions other than ½, ¼, ⅛ 
. Music and math were assessed before, immediately following, and 3- and 
6-months post-intervention. Pre- to post-intervention analyses indicated that 
only the 'MusiMath' group showed greater transfer to intervention-trained and 
untrained fractions than the comparison group. The 'Academic Music' group showed 
a trend on trained fractions. Although both music groups outperformed the 
comparison group 3- and 6-months post-intervention on trained fractions, only 
the 'MusiMath' group demonstrated greater gains in untrained fractions. Gains 
were more evident in trained than in untrained fractions. A video abstract of 
this article can be viewed at https://youtu.be/uJ_KWWDO624.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12882
PMCID: PMC7378943
PMID: 31250477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors whose names are listed immediately 
below certify that they have no affiliations with or involvement in any 
organization or entity with any financial interest (such as honoraria; 
educational grants; participation in speakers’ bureaus; membership, employment, 
consultancies, stock ownership, or other equity interest; and expert testimony 
or patent‐licensing arrangements), or nonfinancial interest (such as personal or 
professional relationships, affiliations, knowledge or beliefs) in the subject 
matter or materials discussed in this manuscript.


221. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov 23:e13067. doi: 10.1111/desc.13067. Online ahead of print.

Development of bilateral parietal activation for complex visual-spatial 
function: Evidence from a visual-spatial construction task.

Ferrara K(1), Seydell-Greenwald A(1), Chambers CE(1), Newport EL(1), Landau 
B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Brain Plasticity and Recovery, Georgetown University, Washington, 
DC, USA.
(2)Department of Cognitive Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 
USA.

The neural representation of visual-spatial functions has traditionally been 
ascribed to the right hemisphere, but little is known about these 
representations in children, including whether and how lateralization of 
function changes over the course of development. Some studies suggest bilateral 
activation early in life that develops toward right-lateralization in adulthood, 
while others find evidence of right-hemispheric dominance in both children and 
adults. We used a complex visual-spatial construction task to examine the nature 
of lateralization and its developmental time course in children ages 5-11 years. 
Participants were shown two puzzle pieces and were asked whether the pieces 
could fit together to make a square; responses required either mental 
translation of the pieces (Translation condition) or both mental translation and 
rotation of the pieces (Rotation condition). Both conditions were compared to a 
matched Luminance control condition that was similar in terms of visual content 
and difficulty but required no spatial analysis. Group and single-subject 
analyses revealed that the Rotation and Translation conditions elicited strongly 
bilateral activation in the same parietal and occipital locations as have been 
previously found for adults. These findings show that visual-spatial 
construction consistently elicits robust bilateral activation from age 5 through 
adulthood. This challenges the idea that spatial functions are all 
right-lateralized, either during early development or in adulthood. More 
generally, these findings provide insights into the developmental course of 
lateralization across different spatial skills and how this may be influenced by 
the computational requirements of the particular functions involved.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13067
PMID: 33226713


222. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e13008. doi: 10.1111/desc.13008. Epub 2020 Jul 5.

Links between screen use and depressive symptoms in adolescents over 16 years: 
Is there evidence for increased harm?

Ferguson CJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stetson University, DeLand, FL, USA.

Recent scholarship has been divided on whether an observed increase in suicides 
in the United States among teenagers and preteens (12-18) can be attributed to 
an increased use in social screen media beginning in 2009. If these concerns are 
accurate effect sizes for the relationship between screen use and suicide should 
increase over the 16 years since 2001. The current study used the Florida Youth 
Risk Behavior Survey data (n = 45,992) from 2001 to 2017, to track effect sizes 
for screen/depression correlations, controlling for age and gender. A second 
dataset from the UK Understanding Society dataset (ns for each wave ranged 
between 3,536 and 4,850) was used to study associations between time spent on 
social media and emotional problems. Metaregression was be used to examine 
whether effect sizes increase across time. Results generally did not support the 
hypothesis that effect sizes between screen and social media use are increasing 
over time. Aside from the trends over time, for any given year, most effect 
sizes were below the r = .10 threshold used for interpretation with the 
exception of computer use which was just at that threshold. It is concluded that 
screens and social media use are unlikely to bear major responsibility for youth 
suicide trends. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=76S7cxiaU88.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13008
PMID: 32573926


223. Dev Sci. 2020 Jul;23(4):e12908. doi: 10.1111/desc.12908. Epub 2019 Oct 21.

Racing dragons and remembering aliens: Benefits of playing number and working 
memory games on kindergartners' numerical knowledge.

Ramani GB(1), Daubert EN(1), Lin GC(2), Kamarsu S(2), Wodzinski A(1), Jaeggi 
SM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology, University of 
Maryland, College Park, MD, USA.
(2)School of Education, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.

Sources that contribute to variation in mathematical achievement include both 
numerical knowledge and general underlying cognitive processing abilities. The 
current study tested the benefits of tablet-based training games that targeted 
each of these areas for improving the mathematical knowledge of kindergarten-age 
children. We hypothesized that playing a number-based game targeting numerical 
magnitude knowledge would improve children's broader numerical skills. We also 
hypothesized that the benefits of playing a working memory (WM) game would 
transfer to children's numerical knowledge given its important underlying role 
in mathematics achievement. Kindergarteners from diverse backgrounds (n = 148; 
52% girls; Mage  = 71.87 months) were randomly assigned to either play a 
number-based game, a WM game, or a control game on a tablet for 10 sessions. 
Structural equation modeling was used to model children's learning gains in 
mathematics and WM across time. Overall, our results suggest that playing the 
number game improved kindergarten children's numerical knowledge at the latent 
level, and these improvements remained stable as assessed 1 month later. 
However, children in the WM group did not improve their numerical knowledge 
compared to children in the control condition. Playing both the number game and 
WM game improved children's WM at the latent level. Importantly, the WM group 
continued to improve their WM for at least a month after playing the games. The 
results demonstrate that computerized games that target both domain-specific and 
domain-general skills can benefit a broad range of kindergarten-aged children.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12908
PMID: 31587470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Dev Sci. 2020 Oct 24:e13054. doi: 10.1111/desc.13054. Online ahead of print.

Early parenting intervention accelerates inhibitory control development among 
CPS-involved children in middle childhood: A randomized clinical trial.

Korom M(1), Goldstein A(1), Tabachnick AR(1), Palmwood EN(1), Simons RF(1), 
Dozier M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Delaware, 
Newark, DE, USA.

Children at risk for neglect or abuse are vulnerable to delays in inhibitory 
control development. Prior findings suggest that early parenting interventions 
that target parental sensitivity and responsiveness during infancy can improve 
executive function outcomes of high-risk children during preschool years; 
however, little is known about how persistent these gains are through middle 
childhood. Participants included 76 CPS-involved children who were randomly 
assigned to either the ABC intervention (N = 32) or the Developmental Education 
for Families (DEF) control intervention (N = 44), and 53 low-risk children. 
Children completed the Stop Signal Reaction Time (SSRT) paradigm at ages 8 and 
10. Intervention group predicted performance on the SSRT at age 8 such that 
children who received the ABC intervention and children in the low-risk group 
performed significantly better than children who received the DEF intervention 
(ABC vs. DEF: Cohen's d = 0.92; low-risk group vs. DEF: d = 0.56). The 
performances of the ABC and the low-risk groups were not statistically 
different. There were no significant group differences in SSRT performance at 
age 10. These findings demonstrate that the ABC intervention has long-term 
beneficial effects on inhibitory control development in children with a history 
of early caregiving adversity. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at 
https://youtu.be/P9oLyfo7pYA.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13054
PMID: 33098739


225. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12979. doi: 10.1111/desc.12979. Epub 2020 May 20.

Understanding the terrible twos: A longitudinal investigation of the impact of 
early executive function and parent-child interactions.

Hughes C(1), Devine RT(2), Mesman J(3), Blair C(4).

Author information:
(1)University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(2)University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(3)University of Leiden, Leiden, Netherlands.
(4)New York University, NY, USA.

Impairments in both executive function and parent-child interactions are 
associated with child externalizing behavior, but few studies have tested the 
uniqueness of these associations in the first years of life. Addressing these 
gaps, the current study involved an international sample (N = 438; 218 boys) 
who, at 14 and 24 months, completed an innovative battery of executive function 
tasks and were filmed at home in dyadic interaction with their mothers, enabling 
detailed observational ratings of maternal support. In addition, parents rated 
infant temperament at 4 months and externalizing behavior at 14 and 24 months. 
Cross-lagged longitudinal analysis showed a unidirectional developmental 
association between executive function at 14 months and externalizing behavior 
at 24 months. In addition, infant negative affect moderated the inverse 
association between maternal support at 14 months and externalizing behavior at 
24 months. The benefits of maternal support were only evident for children with 
low levels of negative affect in infancy. We discuss this finding in relation to 
theoretical models that highlight child effects (e.g. models of vantage 
sensitivity).

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12979
PMID: 32353921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov 5:e13058. doi: 10.1111/desc.13058. Online ahead of print.

The development of race effects in face processing from childhood through 
adulthood: Neural and behavioral evidence.

Golarai G(1), Ghahremani DG(1)(2), Greenwood AC(3), Gabrieli JDE(1)(4), 
Eberhardt JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, Semel Institute for 
Neuroscience and Human Behavior, University of California, Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)The Wright Institute, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, McGovern Institute for Brain 
Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Most adults are better at recognizing recently encountered faces of their own 
race, relative to faces of other races. In adults, this race effect in face 
recognition is associated with differential neural representations of own- and 
other-race faces in the fusiform face area (FFA), a high-level visual region 
involved in face recognition. Previous research has linked these differential 
face representations in adults to viewers' implicit racial associations. 
However, despite the fact that the FFA undergoes a gradual development which 
continues well into adulthood, little is known about the developmental 
time-course of the race effect in FFA responses. Also unclear is how this race 
effect might relate to the development of face recognition or implicit 
associations with own- or other-races during childhood and adolescence. To 
examine the developmental trajectory of these race effects, in a cross-sectional 
study of European American (EA) children (ages 7-11), adolescents (ages 12-16) 
and adults (ages 18-35), we evaluated responses to adult African American (AA) 
and EA face stimuli, using functional magnetic resonance imaging and separate 
behavioral measures outside the scanner. We found that FFA responses to AA and 
EA faces differentiated during development from childhood into adulthood; 
meanwhile, the magnitudes of race effects increased in behavioral measures of 
face-recognition and implicit racial associations. These three race effects were 
positively correlated, even after controlling for age. These findings suggest 
that social and perceptual experiences shape a protracted development of the 
race effect in face processing that continues well into adulthood.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13058
PMID: 33151616


227. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12942. doi: 10.1111/desc.12942. Epub 2020 Feb 11.

Does culture shape face perception in autism? Cross-cultural evidence of the 
own-race advantage from the UK and Japan.

Hanley M(1)(2), Riby DM(1)(2), Derges MJ(1), Douligeri A(1), Philyaw Z(1), Ikeda 
T(3), Monden Y(3)(4), Shimoizumi H(5), Yamagata T(3), Hirai M(6)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Durham University, Durham, UK.
(2)Centre for Developmental Disorders, Durham University, Durham, UK.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi, 
Japan.
(4)International University of Health and Welfare Hospital, Nasushiobara, 
Tochigi, Japan.
(5)International University of Health and Welfare Rehabilitation Center, Nasu 
Institute for Developmental Disabilities, Otawara, Tochigi, Japan.
(6)Center for Development of Advanced Medical Technology, Jichi Medical 
University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi, Japan.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are associated with face perception 
atypicalities, and atypical experience with faces has been proposed as an 
underlying explanation. Studying the own-race advantage (ORA) for face 
recognition can reveal the effect of experience on face perception in ASD, 
although the small number of studies in the area present mixed findings. This 
study probed the ORA in ASD by comparing two cultural groups simultaneously for 
the first time. Children with ASD in the UK (N = 16) and Japan (N = 26) were 
compared with age- and ability-matched typically developing (TD) children in the 
UK (N = 16) and Japan (N = 26). Participants completed a two-alternative 
forced-choice task, whereby they had to recognize a just seen face from a foil 
which was manipulated in one of four ways (IC: identity change; EE: easy eyes; 
HE: hard eyes; HM: hard mouth). Face stimuli were Asian and Caucasian, and thus 
the same stimuli were own and other race depending on the cultural group. The 
ASD groups in the UK and Japan did not show impaired face recognition abilities, 
or impairments with recognizing faces depending on manipulations to the eye 
region, and importantly they showed an ORA. There was considerable heterogeneity 
in the presence of the ORA in ASD and TD and also across cultures. Children in 
Japan had higher accuracy than children in the UK, and TD children in Japan did 
not show an ORA. This cross-cultural study challenges the view that atypical 
experiences with faces lead to a reduced/absent ORA in ASD.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12942
PMID: 31981278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12597. doi: 10.1111/desc.12597. Epub 2017 Sep 7.

Sensitivity to auditory-tactile colocation in early infancy.

Thomas RL(1), Misra R(2), Akkunt E(1), Ho C(2), Spence C(2), Bremner AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Sensorimotor Development Research Unit, Department of Psychology, Goldsmiths, 
University of London, UK.
(2)Crossmodal Research Laboratory, Department of Experimental Psychology, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

An ability to detect the common location of multisensory stimulation is 
essential for us to perceive a coherent environment, to represent the interface 
between the body and the external world, and to act on sensory information. 
Regarding the tactile environment "at hand", we need to represent somatosensory 
stimuli impinging on the skin surface in the same spatial reference frame as 
distal stimuli, such as those transduced by vision and audition. Across two 
experiments we investigated whether 6- (n = 14; Experiment 1) and 4-month-old (n 
= 14; Experiment 2) infants were sensitive to the colocation of tactile and 
auditory signals delivered to the hands. We recorded infants' visual preferences 
for spatially congruent and incongruent auditory-tactile events delivered to 
their hands. At 6 months, infants looked longer toward incongruent stimuli, 
whilst at 4 months infants looked longer toward congruent stimuli. Thus, even 
from 4 months of age, infants are sensitive to the colocation of simultaneously 
presented auditory and tactile stimuli. We conclude that 4- and 6-month-old 
infants can represent auditory and tactile stimuli in a common spatial frame of 
reference. We explain the age-wise shift in infants' preferences from congruent 
to incongruent in terms of an increased preference for novel crossmodal spatial 
relations based on the accumulation of experience. A comparison of looking 
preferences across the congruent and incongruent conditions with a unisensory 
control condition indicates that the ability to perceive auditory-tactile 
colocation is based on a crossmodal rather than a supramodal spatial code by 6 
months of age at least.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12597
PMID: 28880496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12846. doi: 10.1111/desc.12846. Epub 2019 Jun 6.

The relationship between multidimensional economic well-being and children's 
mental health, physical health, and executive function development in South 
Africa.

Turbeville A(1), Aber JL(2), Weinberg SL(1), Richter L(3), van Heerden A(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)New York University, New York City, New York.
(2)NYU Global TIES, New York University, New York City, New York.
(3)DST-NRF Centre of Excellence in Human Development, University of the 
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(4)Human and Social Development Research Programme, Human Sciences Research 
Council, Pretoria, South Africa.

Conceptualizing both economic well-being (EWB) and children's development as 
multidimensional constructs, the present study examines their association using 
bioecological developmental theory and structural equation modeling with Zulu 
children (ages 7-10) in KwaZulu-Natal, a highly impoverished region of South 
Africa (N = 1,958). Relative EWB within impoverished communities consists of 
three dimensions: material assets (durable goods and living environment), fiscal 
appraisal (subjective experiences of access to/allocation of resources), and 
fiscal capacity (monetary inflow/outflow). Children's development also is 
measured across multiple dimensions: physical health, mental health, and 
executive functioning. In addition to an overall association between EWB and 
children's development across outcomes, the sub-dimensions of EWB are 
differentially related to aspects of children's development. The dimension of 
material assets exhibits the greatest association with child outcomes, while 
fiscal capacity exhibits the least. Implications of these findings are 
discussed, including the use of multidimensional approaches to measuring EWB to 
understand, more clearly, its relationship to multiple dimensions of children's 
development. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZcawZ6oOt-Q.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12846
PMCID: PMC6713591
PMID: 31070839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.


230. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12685. doi: 10.1111/desc.12685. Epub 2018 May 20.

Using language input and lexical processing to predict vocabulary size.

Mahr T(1), Edwards J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.
(2)Department of Hearing and Speech Sciences, University of Maryland, College 
Park, MD, USA.

Children learn words by listening to caregivers, and the quantity and quality of 
early language input predict later language development. Recent research 
suggests that word recognition efficiency may influence the relationship between 
input and vocabulary growth. We asked whether language input and lexical 
processing at 28-39 months predicted vocabulary size one year later in 109 
preschoolers. Input was measured using adult word counts from LENA recordings. 
We used the visual world paradigm and measured lexical processing as the rate of 
change in proportion of looks to target. Regression analysis showed that lexical 
processing did not constrain the effect of input on vocabulary size. We also 
found that input and processing were more reliable predictors of receptive than 
expressive vocabulary growth.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12685
PMCID: PMC6324580
PMID: 29781230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Dev Sci. 2019 Jul;22(4):e12803. doi: 10.1111/desc.12803. Epub 2019 Feb 22.

Infants' statistical word segmentation in an artificial language is linked to 
both parental speech input and reported production abilities.

Hoareau M(1), Yeung HH(2), Nazzi T(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Integrative Neuroscience and Cognition Center, Université Paris Descartes, 
Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(2)Department of Linguistics, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada.
(3)CNRS (Integrative Neuroscience and Cognition Center, UMR 8002), Paris, 
France.

Individual variability in infant's language processing is partly explained by 
environmental factors, like the quantity of parental speech input, as well as by 
infant-specific factors, like speech production. Here, we explore how these 
factors affect infant word segmentation. We used an artificial language to 
ensure that only statistical regularities (like transitional probabilities 
between syllables) could cue word boundaries, and then asked how the quantity of 
parental speech input and infants' babbling repertoire predict infants' 
abilities to use these statistical cues. We replicated prior reports showing 
that 8-month-old infants use statistical cues to segment words, with a 
preference for part-words over words (a novelty effect). Crucially, 8-month-olds 
with larger novelty effects had received more speech input at 4 months and had 
greater production abilities at 8 months. These findings establish for the first 
time that the ability to extract statistical information from speech correlates 
with individual factors in infancy, like early speech experience and language 
production. Implications of these findings for understanding individual 
variability in early language acquisition are discussed.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12803
PMID: 30681753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Dev Sci. 2020 Dec 4:e13071. doi: 10.1111/desc.13071. Online ahead of print.

Short report: Improving motor competence skills in early childhood has corollary 
benefits for executive function and numeracy skills.

Hudson KN(1), Ballou HM(1), Willoughby MT(1).

Author information:
(1)Education & Workforce Development, RTI International, Research Triangle Park, 
NC, USA.

Previous studies have documented that individual differences in fine and gross 
motor skills are associated with executive function (EF) skills. This study used 
an experimental design to test whether participating in cognitively challenging 
motor skills activities was causally related to improvements in motor skills and 
two key indicators of school readiness: executive function and early numeracy 
skills. The motor skill program involved fine and gross motor game-like 
activities that were delivered in a small group format. Activities were socially 
engaging and progressively challenged children based on their motor 
competencies. Fifty-three preschool-aged children participated in 16 motor skill 
sessions across 8 weeks. There were significant treatment effects for all 
outcomes, such that children in the treatment condition exhibited significant 
improvements in motor, EF, and early numeracy skills, compared to their peers in 
the waitlist control condition. Treatment effects on EF skills were stronger for 
inhibitory control than working memory. Improvements in numeracy were most 
pronounced for children with initially lower levels of ability. Motor 
skill-based interventions are an ecologically valid and developmentally 
appropriate approach for fostering school readiness skills in early childhood.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13071
PMID: 33275832


233. Dev Sci. 2020 Jul;23(4):e12835. doi: 10.1111/desc.12835. Epub 2019 May 16.

Hidden talents in harsh conditions? A preregistered study of memory and 
reasoning about social dominance.

Frankenhuis WE(1), de Vries SA(1)(2), Bianchi J(3), Ellis BJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Institute of Cognitive and Evolutionary Anthropology, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Psychology, The University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona.
(4)Departments of Psychology and Anthropology, University of Utah, Salt Lake 
City, Utah.

Although growing up in stressful conditions can undermine mental abilities, 
people in harsh environments may develop intact, or even enhanced, social and 
cognitive abilities for solving problems in high-adversity contexts (i.e. 
'hidden talents'). We examine whether childhood and current exposure to violence 
are associated with memory (number of learning rounds needed to memorize 
relations between items) and reasoning performance (accuracy in deducing a novel 
relation) on transitive inference tasks involving both violence-relevant and 
violence-neutral social information (social dominance vs. chronological age). We 
hypothesized that individuals who had more exposure to violence would perform 
better than individuals with less exposure on the social dominance task. We 
tested this hypothesis in a preregistered study in 100 Dutch college students 
and 99 Dutch community participants. We found that more exposure to violence was 
associated with lower overall memory performance, but not with reasoning 
performance. However, the main effects of current (but not childhood) exposure 
to violence on memory were qualified by significant interaction effects. More 
current exposure to neighborhood violence was associated with worse memory for 
age relations, but not with memory for dominance relations. By contrast, more 
current personal involvement in violence was associated with better memory for 
dominance relations, but not with memory for age relations. These results 
suggest incomplete transfer of learning and memory abilities across contents. 
This pattern of results, which supports a combination of deficits and 'hidden 
talents,' is striking in relation to the broader developmental literature, which 
has nearly exclusively reported deficits in people from harsh conditions. A 
video abstract of this article can be viewed at: https://youtu.be/e4ePmSzZsuc.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12835
PMCID: PMC7379268
PMID: 30985945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12858. doi: 10.1111/desc.12858. Epub 2019 Jun 14.

Socioeconomic background, nonverbal IQ and school absence affects the 
development of vocabulary and reading comprehension in children living in severe 
poverty.

Lervåg A(1), Dolean D(2)(3), Tincas I(4), Melby-Lervåg M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Education, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, Babes-Bolyai University, 
Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(3)School of Humanities and Social Sciences, East Georgia State College, 
Swainsboro, Georgia, USA.
(4)Transylvanian Institute of Neuroscience, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(5)Department of Special Needs Education, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Few studies have examined how socioeconomic status (SES) affects two essential 
parts of human development, namely vocabulary and reading comprehension, in 
children facing severe poverty. The Roma population is the largest minority 
group in Europe, the majority of whom live in severe poverty. This study 
compared the development of 322 Roma children with the development of 178 
non-Roma children, between the ages of 7 and 10 years, living in Romania. The 
Roma children had poorer initial vocabulary and reading comprehension skills as 
well as slower growth rates for both compared to the non-Roma children. 
Importantly, SES had a direct influence on growth in both reading comprehension 
and vocabulary. The effect of SES was partly mediated by school absence and 
nonverbal IQ. This is a powerful finding since it suggests that poverty may have 
detrimental effects not only on reading but also on the development of verbal 
abilities.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12858
PMID: 31094030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12678. doi: 10.1111/desc.12678. Epub 2018 Jul 20.

The neural development of pragmatic inference-making in natural discourse.

Schwartz F(1), Epinat-Duclos J(1), Noveck I(1), Prado J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut des Sciences Cognitives Marc Jeannerod - UMR 5304, Centre National 
de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) and Université de Lyon, Lyon, France.

Older interlocutors are more likely than younger ones to make pragmatic 
inferences, that is, inferences that go beyond the linguistically encoded 
meaning of a sentence. Here we ask whether pragmatic development is associated 
with increased activity in brain structures associated with inference-making or 
in those associated with Theory of Mind. We employed a reading task that 
presents vignettes in one of two versions, one of which is expected to prompt 
more pragmatic processing. Both versions present a major premise containing 
three possibilities (e.g., Xavier is considering Thursday, Friday or Saturday 
for inviting his girlfriend out). In the Fully-Deductive (control) condition, 
the major premise is followed by two disjunction-elimination premises through 
two separate lines (one indicating that Saturday is not convenient and another 
saying that Thursday is not convenient); this is followed by a valid conclusion 
(e.g., "I'll reserve Friday"). In the Implicated-Premise condition, the first 
disjunction-elimination premise is followed by a second similar one that 
eliminates the same disjunction (e.g., both lines explain why Saturday is not 
convenient). In this condition, readers may pragmatically enrich the conclusion 
(i.e., "I'll reserve Friday" pragmatically implicates that Xavier is also 
eliminating Thursday from consideration). Reading times in Experiment 1 showed 
that processing the speaker's conclusion in the Implicated-Premise condition 
becomes increasingly more effort-demanding as readers reach adolescence. 
Experiment 2 showed that this developmental pattern is related to age-related 
increases in fMRI activity in fronto-parietal regions typically involved in 
inference-making processes. We found no evidence indicating age effects related 
to Theory of Mind areas.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12678
PMID: 30028059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e12987. doi: 10.1111/desc.12987. Epub 2020 Jun 18.

The evolutionary origins of natural pedagogy: Rhesus monkeys show sustained 
attention following nonsocial cues versus social communicative signals.

Bettle R(1), Rosati AG(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

The natural pedagogy hypothesis proposes that human infants preferentially 
attend to communicative signals from others, facilitating rapid cultural 
learning. In this view, sensitivity to such signals is a uniquely human 
adaptation and as such nonhuman animals should not produce or utilize these 
communicative signals. We test these evolutionary predictions by examining 
sensitivity to communicative cues in 206 rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) using 
an expectancy looking time task modeled on prior work with infants. Monkeys 
observed a human actor who either made eye contact and vocalized to the monkey 
(social cue), or waved a fruit in front of her face and produced a tapping sound 
(nonsocial cue). The actor then either looked at an object (referential look) or 
looked toward empty space (look away). We found that, unlike human infants in 
analogous situations, rhesus monkeys looked longer at events following nonsocial 
cues, regardless of the demonstrator's subsequent looking behavior. Moreover 
younger and older monkeys showed similar patterns of responses across 
development. These results provide support for the natural pedagogy hypothesis, 
while also highlighting evolutionary changes in human sensitivity to 
communicative signals.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12987
PMCID: PMC7666658
PMID: 32412163


237. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov 7:e13060. doi: 10.1111/desc.13060. Online ahead of print.

Electroencephalography decoding of Chinese characters in primary school children 
and its prediction for word reading performance and development.

Lui KFH(1), Lo JCM(1), Maurer U(1)(2), Ho CS(3), McBride C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(2)Brain and Mind Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(3)Department of Psychology, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

Research on what neural mechanisms facilitate word reading development in 
non-alphabetic scripts is relatively rare. The present study was among the first 
to adopt a multivariate pattern classification analysis to decode 
electroencephalographic signals recorded for primary school children (N = 236) 
while performing a Chinese character decision task. Chinese is an ideal script 
for studying the relationship between neural discriminability (i.e., 
decodability) of the orthography and behavioral word reading skills since the 
mapping from orthography to phonology is relatively arbitrary in Chinese. This 
was also among the first empirical attempts to examine the extent to which 
decoding performance can predict current and subsequent word reading skills 
using a longitudinal design. Results showed that neural activation patterns of 
real characters can be distinguished from activation patterns for 
pseudo-characters, non-characters, and random stroke combinations in both 
younger and older children. Topography of the transformed classifier weights 
revealed two distinct cognitive sub-processes underlying single character 
recognition, but temporal generalization analysis suggested common neural 
mechanisms between the distinct cognitive sub-processes. Suggestive evidence 
from correlational and hierarchical regression analyses showed that decoding 
performance, assessed on average 2 months before the year 2 behavioral testing, 
predicted both year 1 word reading performance and the development of word 
reading fluency over the year. Results demonstrate that decoding performance, 
one indicator of how the neural system is functionally organized in processing 
characters and character-like stimuli, can serve as a useful neural marker in 
predicting current word reading skills and the capacity to learn to read.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13060
PMID: 33159696


238. Dev Sci. 2020 Oct 9:e13048. doi: 10.1111/desc.13048. Online ahead of print.

Physical fitness and brain source localization during a working memory task in 
children with overweight/obesity: The ActiveBrains project.

Mora-Gonzalez J(1)(2), Esteban-Cornejo I(1), Migueles JH(1), Rodriguez-Ayllon 
M(1), Molina-Garcia P(1)(3), Cadenas-Sanchez C(1)(4), Solis-Urra P(1)(5), 
Plaza-Florido A(1), Kramer AF(6)(7), Erickson KI(8), Hillman CH(6)(9), Catena 
A(10), Ortega FB(1).

Author information:
(1)PROFITH "PROmoting FITness and Health through physical activity" Research 
Group, Department of Physical Education and Sports, Faculty of Sports Science, 
University of Granada, Granada, Spain.
(2)College of Health and Human Services, University of North Carolina at 
Charlotte, Charlotte, NC, USA.
(3)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, KU Leuven - University of Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Institute for Innovation & Sustainable Development in Food Chain (IS-FOOD), 
Public University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
(5)IRyS Research Group, School of Physical Education, Pontificia Universidad 
Católica de Valparaiso, Valparaiso, Chile.
(6)Department of Psychology, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL, 
USA.
(8)Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, Sennott Square, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(9)Department of Physical Therapy, Movement & Rehabilitation Sciences, 
Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA.
(10)Department of Experimental Psychology, Mind, Brain and Behaviour Research 
Centre (CIMCYC), University of Granada, Granada, Spain.

The present study aims (i) to examine the association of physical fitness 
components (i.e., cardiorespiratory fitness, speed-agility, and muscular 
fitness) with brain current source density during working memory; and (ii) to 
examine whether fitness-related current density was associated to working memory 
performance and academic achievement. Eighty-five children with 
overweight/obesity aged 8-11 years participated in this cross-sectional study. 
Physical fitness components were assessed using the ALPHA test battery. 
Electroencephalography recordings were performed during a Delayed 
Non-Match-to-Sample task that assessed working memory. Brain source analysis was 
carried out using sLORETA to estimate regional current source density 
differences between high and low (H-L) working memory loads. Academic 
achievement was measured by the Spanish version of the Woodcock-Johnson III test 
battery. The main results showed that higher cardiorespiratory fitness was 
associated with higher H-L current density differences in frontal, limbic, and 
occipital regions during encoding and maintenance task's phases (β≥0.412, 
p ≤ 0.019). A limbic area was further related to better working memory 
performance (β=0.267, p = 0.005). During retrieval, higher cardiorespiratory 
fitness was also associated with higher current density in temporal regions 
(β=0.265, p = 0.013), whereas lower muscular fitness was associated with higher 
current density in frontal regions (β=-0.261, p = 0.016). Our results suggest 
that cardiorespiratory fitness, but not speed-agility nor muscular fitness, is 
positively associated with brain current source density during working memory 
processes in children with overweight/obesity. Fitness-related current density 
differences in limbic regions were associated with better working memory.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13048
PMID: 33037758


239. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12810. doi: 10.1111/desc.12810. Epub 2019 Mar 22.

Evolution of the wealth gap in child development and mediating pathways: 
Evidence from a longitudinal study in Bogota, Colombia.

Rubio-Codina M(1), Grantham-McGregor S(2).

Author information:
(1)Social Protection and Health Division, Inter-American Development Bank, 
Washington, District of Columbia.
(2)Institute of Child Health, University College London, London, UK.

Large gaps in cognition and language on the Bayley-III between the top and 
bottom household wealth quartiles in 1,330 children aged 6-42 months in a 
representative sample of low- and middle-income families in Bogota were 
previously shown. Maternal education and the home environment mediated these 
wealth effects, whereas height-for-age mediated a small amount of the language 
deficit only. At ages 6-8 years, we relocated 72% of the children and assessed 
their IQ on the WISC-V, school achievement, and behavior to investigate the 
evolution of the wealth gaps and potential mediators. The wealth gap in IQ at 
6-8 years was significantly larger than that in a factor combining Bayley-III 
language and cognition at 6-42 months; whereas the gap in achievement was larger 
but not significantly. Moreover, in cross-sectional analysis, the IQ gap 
increased from 6 to 8 years reaching over 1 SD. In contrast, the gap in behavior 
was not significant in either childhood stage. Parental education and early home 
environment remained major mediators of the wealth gap in IQ and achievement at 
6-8 years; later home environment and attending private education also had an 
effect; and early height-for-age was no longer significant. The home environment 
partly mediated the effect of parental education on wealth. All mediators 
combined explained most of the variance in the wealth gap; the remaining gaps 
being not significant. Results highlight the importance of the early home 
environment and suggest that interventions focusing on that should have 
long-term benefits. Also, continued intervention through to 8 years may be 
desirable. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at 
https://youtu.be/_U53iXNww3I.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12810
PMID: 30742349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12820. doi: 10.1111/desc.12820. Epub 2019 Mar 10.

Associations of physical activity and gross motor skills with executive function 
in preschool children from low-income South African settings.

Cook CJ(1), Howard SJ(2), Scerif G(3), Twine R(4), Kahn K(4)(5), Norris SA(6), 
Draper CE(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Exercise Science and Sports Medicine, Department of Human 
Biology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(2)Early Start and School of Education, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, 
NSW, Australia.
(3)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(4)MRC/Wits Rural Public Health and Health Transitions Research Unit 
(Agincourt), School of Public Health, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of 
the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(5)Umeå Centre for Global Health Research, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(6)MRC/Wits Developmental Pathways for Health Research Unit, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.

Executive function is foundational for cognitive development. Previous research 
has shown both gross motor skills and physical activity to be related to 
executive function. However, evidence for these relationships in the preschool 
years, as well as in low- and middle-income countries is lacking. Therefore, 
this study aimed to investigate the relationships between components of 
executive function (inhibition, shifting and working memory) and gross motor 
skills (locomotor skills and object control skills) in a sample of preschool 
children from urban and rural low-income settings in South Africa. Results 
revealed that inhibition and working memory, but not shifting, were associated 
with gross motor skills. More specifically: inhibition was associated with both 
locomotor [β = 0.20, p = 0.047] and object control skills [β = 0.24, p = 0.024], 
whereas working memory was only associated with locomotor skills [β = 0.21, 
p = 0.039]. Physical activity was not associated with inhibition and shifting 
but was negatively associated with working memory. These results elaborate a 
growing evidence base linking executive function and gross motor skills in the 
early years, and it is the first to look at specific associations of locomotor 
and object control skills with executive function in the South African context 
(a low- and middle-income country).

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12820
PMID: 30801916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12613. doi: 10.1111/desc.12613. Epub 2017 Nov 15.

Early contributions to infants' mental rotation abilities.

Constantinescu M(1), Moore DS(2), Johnson SP(3), Hines M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(2)Psychology Field Group, Pitzer College and Claremont Graduate University, 
Claremont, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Some cognitive abilities exhibit reliable gender differences, with females 
outperforming males in specific aspects of verbal ability, and males showing an 
advantage on certain spatial tasks. Among these cognitive gender differences, 
differences in mental rotation are the most robust, and appear to be present 
even in infants. A large body of animal research suggests that gonadal hormones, 
particularly testosterone, during early development could contribute to this 
gender difference in mental rotation. Also, substantial evidence supports an 
influence of socialization on mental rotation performance. The present study 
investigated the relationship of two types of factors, early postnatal 
testosterone exposure and parental attitudes about gender, to mental rotation 
performance in 61 healthy infants (29 males, 32 females). We measured salivary 
testosterone at two time points: 1-2.5 months of age and 5-6 months of age. 
Infants' mental rotation performance and parents' attitudes about gender were 
assessed at 5-6 months of age. As predicted, testosterone concentrations were 
significantly higher in boys than girls in early infancy (d = 0.54), and boys 
performed significantly better than girls on mental rotation (d = 0.64). A 
significant positive correlation between testosterone at age 1-2.5 months and 
mental rotation was found only in boys (r = 0.50, p = .01). A significant 
negative correlation between parents' gender-stereotypical attitudes and mental 
rotation performance was found only in girls (r = -.57, p = .002). These 
findings suggest that the early postnatal testosterone surge (also known as 
"mini-puberty") may have organizational influences on mental rotation 
performance in boys, and that parents may influence their daughters' mental 
rotation abilities beginning very early in life.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12613
PMID: 29143410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov 4:e13059. doi: 10.1111/desc.13059. Online ahead of print.

In infancy, it's the extremes of arousal that are 'sticky': Naturalistic data 
challenge purely homeostatic approaches to studying self-regulation.

Wass SV(1), Smith CG(2), Clackson K(3), Mirza FU(4).

Author information:
(1)University of East London, London, UK.
(2)Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College, London, 
UK.
(3)University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(4)University of Plymouth, Plymouth, UK.

Most theoretical models of arousal/regulatory function emphasise the maintenance 
of homeostasis; consistent with this, most previous research into arousal has 
concentrated on examining individuals' recovery following the administration of 
experimentally administered stressors. Here, we take a different approach: we 
recorded day-long spontaneous fluctuations in autonomic arousal (indexed via 
electrocardiogram, heart rate variability and actigraphy) in a cohort of 82 
typically developing 12-month-old infants while they were at home and awake. 
Based on the aforementioned models, we hypothesised that extreme high or low 
arousal states might be more short-lived than intermediate arousal states. Our 
results suggested that, contrary to this, both low- and high-arousal states were 
more persistent than intermediate arousal states. The same pattern was present 
when the data were viewed over multiple epoch sizes from 1 s to 5 min; over 
10-15-minute time-scales, high-arousal states were more persistent than low- and 
intermediate states. One possible explanation for these findings is that extreme 
arousal states have intrinsically greater hysteresis; another is that, through 
'metastatic' processes, small initial increases and decreases in arousal can 
become progressively amplified over time. Rather than exclusively using 
experimental paradigms to study recovery, we argue that future research should 
also use naturalistic data to study the mechanisms through which states can be 
maintained or amplified over time.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13059
PMID: 33147373


243. Dev Sci. 2020 Jan;23(1):e12872. doi: 10.1111/desc.12872. Epub 2019 Jun 14.

The long-term effects of institutional rearing, foster care intervention and 
disruptions in care on brain electrical activity in adolescence.

Debnath R(1), Tang A(1), Zeanah CH(2), Nelson CA(3)(4), Fox NA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology, University of 
Maryland, College Park, Maryland.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Tulane University School of 
Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana.
(3)Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Exposure to early psychosocial deprivation as a result of institutional care 
disrupts typical brain development. The Bucharest Early Intervention Project 
(BEIP) is the first longitudinal study to investigate the neurodevelopment of 
institutionalized infants randomized to a foster care (FCG) intervention versus 
care as usual (CAUG). Here, we present findings from a follow-up assessment of 
brain electrical activity as indexed by resting EEG at age 16 years. In 
addition, we examined the effects of disruption of foster care placement (e.g. 
the number of moves among foster care placements) on brain electrical activity. 
Resting-state EEG was collected from 48 CAUG, 46 FCG and 48 never 
institutionalized (NIG) control participants. Absolute (µV2 ) and relative 
(proportion) power were computed from eyes closed, resting EEG data for theta, 
alpha and beta frequency bands. The CAUG displayed higher relative theta and 
lower relative alpha power compared to the FCG at 16 years of age. The FCG 
showed brain activity comparable to the NIG. The results further showed that 
disruptions following the original foster care placement had an adverse effect 
on brain electrical activity. Within the foster care group, there were no 
effects of age of placement on EEG power. Placement of children who have 
experienced early institutional rearing into stable foster care settings ensure 
long-term improvement in brain functioning.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12872
PMCID: PMC6884653
PMID: 31148302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Dev Sci. 2019 May;22(3):e12764. doi: 10.1111/desc.12764. Epub 2019 Jan 15.

Parents' early book reading to children: Relation to children's later language 
and literacy outcomes controlling for other parent language input.

Ece Demir-Lira Ö(1), Applebaum LR(2), Goldin-Meadow S(3), Levine SC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, DeLTA Center, Iowa 
Neuroscience Institute, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa.
(2)Museum of Science and Industry, Chicago, Illinois.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.

It is widely believed that reading to preschool children promotes their language 
and literacy skills. Yet, whether early parent-child book reading is an index of 
generally rich linguistic input or a unique predictor of later outcomes remains 
unclear. To address this question, we asked whether naturally occurring 
parent-child book reading interactions between 1 and 2.5 years-of-age predict 
elementary school language and literacy outcomes, controlling for the quantity 
of other talk parents provide their children, family socioeconomic status, and 
children's own early language skill. We find that the quantity of parent-child 
book reading interactions predicts children's later receptive vocabulary, 
reading comprehension, and internal motivation to read (but not decoding, 
external motivation to read, or math skill), controlling for these other 
factors. Importantly, we also find that parent language that occurs during book 
reading interactions is more sophisticated than parent language outside book 
reading interactions in terms of vocabulary diversity and syntactic complexity.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12764
PMCID: PMC6927670
PMID: 30325107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e12998. doi: 10.1111/desc.12998. Epub 2020 Jun 22.

Breadth versus depth: Cumulative risk model and continuous measure prediction of 
poor language and reading outcomes at 12.

Hayiou-Thomas ME(1), Smith-Woolley E(2), Dale PS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of York, York, UK.
(2)The Physiological Society, London, UK.
(3)Department of Speech & Hearing Sciences, University of New Mexico, 
Albuquerque, NM, USA.

This study examines whether, and how, multiple risks in early childhood are 
associated with an increased likelihood of a poor language or literacy outcome 
in early adolescence. Using data from 210 participants in the longitudinal Twins 
Early Developmental Study, we focus on the following risk factors at age 4: 
family risk, and poor language, speech, emergent literacy and nonverbal skills. 
The outcomes of interest at age 12 are language, reading fluency and reading 
comprehension. We contrast a 'cumulative risk' model, counting the presence or 
absence of each risk factor (breadth), with a model that also considers the 
severity of the early deficits (depth). A 'cumulative risk index' correlated 
modestly but significantly with outcome (r = 0.32-0.40). Odds ratios confirmed 
that having many risk factors (3-6) confers a higher probability of a poor 
outcome (OR 7.86-17.71) than having one or two (OR 3.65-7.28). Logistic 
regression models showed that predictive validity is not improved by including 
information about the severity of each deficit. Even with rich information on 
children's risk status at age 4, we can make only a moderately accurate 
prediction of the likelihood of a language or literacy disorder 8 years later 
(Area Under the Curve = 0.74-0.84; Positive Predictive Value = 0.33-0.55, 
Negative Predictive Value = 0.86-0.91). Taken together, and consistent with the 
idea of 'cumulative risk', these results suggest that the breadth of risk is a 
core predictor of outcome, and furthermore, that the severity of early deficits 
does not add significantly to this prediction.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12998
PMID: 32449284


246. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12963. doi: 10.1111/desc.12963. Epub 2020 Jun 2.

When slowing down processing helps learning: Lexico-semantic structure supports 
retention, but interferes with disambiguation of novel object-label mappings.

Borovsky A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, Purdue University, West 
Lafayette, IN, USA.

This project explores how children disambiguate and retain novel object-label 
mappings in the face of semantic similarity. Burgeoning evidence suggests that 
semantic structure in the developing lexicon promotes word learning in ostensive 
contexts, whereas other findings indicate that semantic similarity interferes 
with and temporarily slows familiar word recognition. This project explores how 
these distinct processes interact when mapping and retaining labels for novel 
objects (i.e., low-frequency objects that are unfamiliar to toddlers) via 
disambiguation from a semantically similar familiar referent in 24-month-olds 
(N = 65). Toddlers' log-adjusted looking to labeled target objects (relative to 
distractor objects) was measured in three conditions: Familiar trials (familiar 
label spoken while viewing semantically related familiar and novel objects), 
Disambiguation trials (unfamiliar label spoken while viewing semantically 
similar familiar and unfamiliar object), and Retention trials (unfamiliar label 
spoken while viewing novel object pairs). Toddlers' individual vocabulary 
structure was then compared to performance on each condition. Vocabulary 
structure was measured at two levels: category-level structure (semantic 
density) for experimental items, and lexicon-level structure (global clustering 
coefficient). The findings suggest, consistent with prior results, that semantic 
density interfered with known word recognition, and facilitated unfamiliar word 
retention. Children did not show a significant novel word preference during 
disambiguation, and disambiguation behavior was not impacted by semantic 
structure. These findings connect seemingly disparate mechanisms of semantic 
interference in processing and semantic leveraging in word learning. Semantic 
interference momentarily slows word recognition and resolution of referential 
uncertainty for novel label-object mappings. Nevertheless, this slowing might 
support retention by enabling comparison between related objects.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12963
PMID: 32160363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12878. doi: 10.1111/desc.12878. Epub 2019 Jul 2.

Longitudinal causal impacts of preschool teacher training on Ghanaian children's 
school readiness: Evidence for persistence and fade-out.

Wolf S(1), Aber JL(2), Behrman JR(1), Peele M(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(2)New York University, New York, New York.

Preschool programs have expanded rapidly in low- and middle-income countries, 
but there are widespread concerns about whether they are of sufficient quality 
to promote children's learning and development. We conducted a large 
school-randomized control trial ('Quality Preschool for Ghana' - QP4G) of a 
one-year teacher training and coaching program, with and without 
parental-awareness meetings, designed to improve preschool quality and child 
development. We followed 3,435 children in 240 schools in the Greater Accra 
Region of Ghana, a country with universal pre-primary education. A previous 
study reported positive impacts of teacher training (but not teacher training 
plus parental-awareness meetings) at the end of the implementation year on some 
dimensions of classroom quality, teacher well-being, and children's school 
readiness (Wolf et al., [2019] Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 
12, 10-37). The present study analyzed a new round of data collected 1 year 
after the end of implementation to assess (a) the extent of persistence in 
impacts on child development and (b) whether such impacts vary by select child, 
household, and school characteristics. We found impacts of the teacher training 
intervention on children's overall school readiness were sustained (d = 0.13), 
but were only marginally statistically significant. When broken down by domain, 
impacts on social-emotional skills specifically persisted. Persistent negative 
effects of teacher training plus parental-awareness meetings varied by the 
literacy status of the male parent such that negative impacts were concentrated 
in children in households with non-literate male heads.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12878
PMID: 31173662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Dev Sci. 2020 Dec 11:e13075. doi: 10.1111/desc.13075. Online ahead of print.

Are adolescents more optimal decision-makers in novel environments? Examining 
the benefits of heightened exploration in a patch foraging paradigm.

Lloyd A(1), McKay R(1), Sebastian CL(1), Balsters JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Royal Holloway, University of London, Egham, UK.

Adolescence is a period of heightened exploration relative to adulthood and 
childhood. This predisposition has been linked with negative behaviours related 
to risk-taking, including dangerous driving, substance misuse and risky sexual 
practices. However, recent models have argued that adolescents' heightened 
exploration serves a functional purpose within the lifespan, allowing 
adolescents to develop experiential knowledge of their surroundings. Yet, there 
is limited evidence that heightened exploration in adolescence is associated 
with positive outcomes. To address this, the present pre-registered study 
utilised a foraging paradigm with a sample of adolescents aged 16-17 (N = 68) 
and of adults aged 21 and above (N = 69). Participants completed a patch 
foraging task, which required them to choose between exploiting a known resource 
which gradually yields fewer rewards, and exploring a novel, unknown resource 
with a fresh distribution of rewards. Findings demonstrated that adolescents 
explored more than adults, which - in the context of the current 
task-represented more optimal patch foraging behaviour. These findings indicate 
that adolescents' heightened exploration can be beneficial, as they were able to 
effectively navigate unknown environments and accrue rewards more successfully 
than adults. This provides evidence that heightened exploration in adolescence, 
relative to adulthood, can lead to positive outcomes and contributes to our 
understanding of the role increased novelty-seeking plays at this point in the 
lifespan.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13075
PMID: 33305510


249. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12808. doi: 10.1111/desc.12808. Epub 2019 Mar 10.

Adaptation of the Mullen Scales of Early Learning for use among infants aged 5- 
to 24-months in rural Gambia.

Milosavljevic B(1), Vellekoop P(2), Maris H(1), Halliday D(3), Drammeh S(4), 
Sanyang L(4), Darboe MK(4), Elwell C(5), Moore SE(6), Lloyd-Fox S(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Birkbeck, University of London, 
London, UK.
(2)The Global Health and Tropical Medicine Training Institute, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada.
(4)Medical Research Council, The Gambia, at The London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(5)Department of Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, University College 
London, London, UK.
(6)Department of Women and Children's Health, King's College London, London, UK.
(7)Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Infants in low-resource settings are at heightened risk for compromised 
cognitive development due to a multitude of environmental insults in their 
surroundings. However, the onset of adverse outcomes and trajectory of cognitive 
development in these settings is not well understood. The aims of the present 
study were to adapt the Mullen Scales of Early Learning (MSEL) for use with 
infants in a rural area of The Gambia, to examine cognitive development in the 
first 24-months of life and to assess the association between cognitive 
performance and physical growth. In Phase 1 of this study, the adapted MSEL was 
tested on 52 infants aged 9- to 24-months (some of whom were tested 
longitudinally at two time points). Further optimization and training were 
undertaken and Phase 2 of the study was conducted, where the original measures 
were administered to 119 newly recruited infants aged 5- to 24-months. Infant 
length, weight and head circumference were measured concurrently in both phases. 
Participants from both phases were split into age categories of 5-9 m (N = 32), 
10-14 m (N = 92), 15-19 m (N = 53) and 20-24 m (N = 43) and performance was 
compared across age groups. From the ages of 10-14 m, Gambian infants obtained 
lower MSEL scores than US norms. Performance decreased with age and was lowest 
in the 20-24 m old group. Differential onsets of reduced performance were 
observed in the individual MSEL domains, with declines in visual perception and 
motor performance detected as early as at 10-14 months, while reduced language 
scores became evident after 15-19 months of age. Performance on the MSEL was 
significantly associated with measures of growth.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12808
PMCID: PMC6767903
PMID: 30739382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors confirm that they have no conflict 
of interest.


250. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12564. doi: 10.1111/desc.12564. Epub 2017 May 15.

The specificity of the neural response to speech at birth.

May L(1), Gervain J(2), Carreiras M(3)(4), Werker JF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(2)CNRS-Paris Descartes, Paris, France.
(3)Basque Centre for Cognition, Brain, & Language (BCBL), San Sebastián, Spain.
(4)Basque Foundation for Science (IKERBASQUE), Bizkaia, Spain.

In this work we ask whether at birth, the human brain responds uniquely to 
speech, or if similar activation also occurs to a non-speech surrogate 
'language'. We compare neural activation in newborn infants to the language 
heard in utero (English), to an unfamiliar language (Spanish), and to a whistled 
surrogate language (Silbo Gomero) that, while used by humans to communicate, is 
not speech. Anterior temporal areas of the neonate cortex are activated in 
response to both familiar and unfamiliar spoken language, but these classic 
language areas are not activated to the whistled surrogate form. These results 
suggest that at the time human infants emerge from the womb, the neural 
preparation for language is specialized to speech.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12564
PMID: 28503845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2):e12554. doi: 10.1111/desc.12554. Epub 2017 Apr 26.

Incidental learning in a multisensory environment across childhood.

Broadbent HJ(1), White H(1), Mareschal D(1), Kirkham NZ(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Birkbeck, University of London, 
London, UK.

Multisensory information has been shown to modulate attention in infants and 
facilitate learning in adults, by enhancing the amodal properties of a stimulus. 
However, it remains unclear whether this translates to learning in a 
multisensory environment across middle childhood, and particularly in the case 
of incidental learning. One hundred and eighty-one children aged between 6 and 
10 years participated in this study using a novel Multisensory Attention 
Learning Task (MALT). Participants were asked to respond to the presence of a 
target stimulus whilst ignoring distractors. Correct target selection resulted 
in the movement of the target exemplar to either the upper left or right screen 
quadrant, according to category membership. Category membership was defined 
either by visual-only, auditory-only or multisensory information. As early as 
6 years of age, children demonstrated greater performance on the incidental 
categorization task following exposure to multisensory audiovisual cues compared 
to unisensory information. These findings provide important insight into the use 
of multisensory information in learning, and particularly on incidental category 
learning. Implications for the deployment of multisensory learning tasks within 
education across development will be discussed.

2017 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12554
PMCID: PMC5873275
PMID: 28447388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12644. doi: 10.1111/desc.12644. Epub 2017 Dec 20.

Is conditional reasoning related to mathematical problem solving?

Wong TT(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The Education University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(2)Psychological Assessment and Clinical Research Unit, The Education University 
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

The current study aimed to investigate the relation between conditional 
reasoning, which is a common type of logical reasoning, and children's 
mathematical problem solving. A sample of 124 fourth graders was tested for 
their conditional reasoning skills and their mathematical problem solving 
skills, as well as a list of control variables (e.g., IQ, working memory, 
reading) and potential mediators (number sentence construction and computation). 
The children's ability to make modus ponens (MP) inferences significantly 
predicted their mathematical problem solving skills, even after controlling for 
the potential confounding variables. The relation was mediated by the number 
sentence construction skills. The findings, in addition to supporting the link 
between conditional reasoning and mathematics, further indicate that the ability 
to process relations may be the mechanism underlying the relation. Theoretical 
and practical implications are discussed.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12644
PMID: 29266674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov 13:e13063. doi: 10.1111/desc.13063. Online ahead of print.

Boys' Advantage on the Fractions Number Line is Mediated by Visuospatial 
Attention: Evidence for a Parietal-Spatial Contribution to Number Line Learning.

Geary DC(1), Scofield JE(1), Hoard MK(1), Nugent L(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Missouri.

The study tested the hypotheses that boys will have an advantage learning the 
fractions number line and this advantage will be mediated by spatial abilities. 
Fractions number line and, as a contrast, fractions arithmetic performance was 
assessed for 342 adolescents, as was their intelligence, working memory, and 
various spatial abilities. Boys showed smaller placement errors on the fractions 
number line (d = -0.22) and correctly solved more fractions arithmetic problems 
(d = 0.23) than girls. Working memory and intelligence predicted performance on 
both fractions measures, and a measure of visuospatial attention uniquely 
predicted number line performance and fully mediated the sex difference. 
Visuospatial working memory uniquely predicted fractions arithmetic performance 
and fully mediated the sex difference. The results help to clarify the nuanced 
relations between spatial abilities and formal mathematics learning and the sex 
differences that often emerge in mathematical domains that have a visuospatial 
component.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13063
PMID: 33185311


254. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e12989. doi: 10.1111/desc.12989. Epub 2020 May 28.

Evidence for discrete profiles of children's physiological activity across three 
neurobiological system and their transitions over time.

Roubinov DS(1), Boyce WT(1)(2), Lee MR(3), Bush NR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, California, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, California, USA.
(3)Center of Alcohol and Substance Use Studies (CAS), Graduate School of Applied 
and Professional Psychology, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New 
Brunswick, New Jersy, USA.

The conceptualization of stress-responsive physiological systems as operating in 
an integrated manner is evident in several theoretical models of cross-system 
functioning. However, limited empirical research has modeled the complexity of 
multisystem activity. Moreover few studies have explored developmentally 
regulated changes in multisystem activity during early childhood when plasticity 
is particularly pronounced. The current study used latent profile analysis (LPA) 
to evaluate multisystem activity during fall and spring of children's transition 
to kindergarten in three biological systems: the parasympathetic nervous system 
(PNS), sympathetic nervous system (SNS), and hypothalamic pituitary adrenal 
(HPA) axis. Latent transition analysis (LTA) was then used to examine the 
stability of profile classification across time. Across both timepoints, three 
distinct profiles of multisystem activity emerged. One profile was characterized 
by heightened HPA axis activity (HPA Axis Responders), a second profile was 
characterized by moderate, typically adaptive patterns across the PNS, SNS, and 
HPA axis (Active Copers/Mobilizers), and a third profile was characterized by 
heightened baseline activity, particularly in the PNS and SNS (Anticipatory 
Arousal/ANS Responders). LTA of fall-to-spring profile classifications indicated 
higher probabilities that children remained in the same profile over time 
compared to probabilities of profile changes, suggesting stability in certain 
patterns of cross-system responsivity. Patterns of profile stability and change 
were associated with socioemotional outcomes at the end of the school year. 
Findings highlight the utility of LPA and LTA to detect meaningful patterns of 
complex multisystem physiological activity across three systems and their 
associations with early adjustment during an important developmental transition.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12989
PMCID: PMC7669674
PMID: 32416021


255. Dev Sci. 2019 Mar;22(2):e12728. doi: 10.1111/desc.12728. Epub 2018 Oct 2.

The ontogeny of intent-based normative judgments.

Proft M(1), Rakoczy H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Psychology, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, 
Germany.

When evaluating norm transgressions, children begin to show some sensitivity to 
the agent's intentionality around preschool age. However, the specific 
developmental trajectories of different forms of such intent-based judgments and 
their cognitive underpinnings are still largely unclear. The current studies, 
therefore, systematically investigated the development of intent-based normative 
judgments as a function of two crucial factors: (a) the type of the agent's 
mental state underlying a normative transgression, and (b) the type of norm 
transgressed (moral versus conventional). In Study 1, 5- and 7-year-old children 
as well as adults were presented with vignettes in which an agent transgressed 
either a moral or a conventional norm. Crucially, she did so either 
intentionally, accidentally (not intentionally at all) or unknowingly 
(intentionally, yet based on a false belief regarding the outcome). The results 
revealed two asymmetries in children's intent-based judgments. First, all age 
groups showed greater sensitivity to mental state information for moral compared 
to conventional transgressions. Second, children's (but not adults') normative 
judgments were more sensitive to the agent's intention than to her belief. Two 
subsequent studies investigated this asymmetry in children more closely and 
found evidence that it is based on performance factors: children are able in 
principle to take into account an agent's false belief in much the same way as 
her intentions, yet do not make belief-based judgments in many existing tasks 
(like that of Study 1) due to their inferential complexity. Taken together, 
these findings contribute to a more systematic understanding of the development 
of intent-based normative judgment.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12728
PMID: 30276934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12833. doi: 10.1111/desc.12833. Epub 2019 Apr 24.

Impact of maternal adverse childhood experiences on child socioemotional 
function in rural Kenya: Mediating role of maternal mental health.

Rieder AD(1)(2), Roth SL(2), Musyimi C(3), Ndetei D(3)(4), Sassi RB(5), Mutiso 
V(4), Hall GB(1)(2), Gonzalez A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Program, McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology, Neuroscience & Behaviour, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Canada.
(3)Africa Mental Health Foundation, Nairobi, Kenya.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of Nairobi, Nairobi, Kenya.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Neurosciences, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Mothers in low- and middle-income countries (LMIC) suffer heightened 
vulnerability for adverse childhood experiences (ACEs), which is exacerbated by 
the multitude of risk factors associated with poverty and may lead to increased 
risk of psychiatric disorder. The constellation of complex, co-occurring 
biological, environmental, social, economic and psychological risk factors are 
in turn transmitted to her child, conferring vulnerability for adverse 
development. This study examines the association between maternal intra- and 
extra-familial ACEs, maternal education and the mental health of her child, 
mediated by maternal mental health. Mother-child dyads (n = 121) in Machakos, 
Kenya were examined cross-sectionally using self-report measures of ACEs, 
maternal mental health and child internalizing and externalizing mental health 
problems. The four models proposed to examine the relationship between intra- 
and extra-familial maternal ACEs and child internalizing and externalizing 
problems demonstrated indirect pathways through maternal mental health. These 
effects were found to be conditional on levels of maternal education, which 
served as a protective factor at lower levels of maternal ACEs. These models 
demonstrate how the impact of ACEs persists across the lifespan resulting in a 
negative impact on maternal mental health and conferring further risk to 
subsequent generations. Elucidating the association between ACEs and subsequent 
intergenerational sequelae, especially in LMIC where risk is heightened, may 
improve targeted caregiver mental health programs for prevention and 
intervention.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12833
PMID: 30943319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12761. doi: 10.1111/desc.12761. Epub 2018 Nov 12.

Early development of visual attention in infants in rural Malawi.

Pyykkö J(1), Forssman L(2), Maleta K(3), Ashorn P(1)(4), Ashorn U(1), Leppänen 
JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Tampere Center for Child Health Research, Faculty of Medicine and Life 
Sciences, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland.
(2)Department of Psychology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Public Health, School of Public Health and Family Medicine, 
College of Medicine, University of Malawi, Blantyre, Malawi.
(4)Department of Paediatrics, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.

Eye tracking research has shown that infants develop a repertoire of attentional 
capacities during the first year. The majority of studies examining the early 
development of attention comes from Western, high-resource countries. We 
examined visual attention in a heterogeneous sample of infants in rural Malawi 
(N = 312-376, depending on analysis). Infants were assessed with 
eye-tracking-based tests that targeted visual orienting, anticipatory looking, 
and attention to faces at 7 and 9 months. Consistent with prior research, 
infants exhibited active visual search for salient visual targets, anticipatory 
saccades to predictable events, and a robust attentional bias for happy and 
fearful faces. Individual variations in these processes had low to moderate 
odd-even split-half and test-retest reliability. There were no consistent 
associations between attention measures and gestational age, nutritional status, 
or characteristics of the rearing environment (i.e., maternal cognition, 
psychosocial well-being, socioeconomic status, and care practices). The results 
replicate infants' early attentional biases in a large, unique sample, and 
suggest that some of these biases (e.g., bias for faces) are pronounced in 
low-resource settings. The results provided no evidence that the initial 
manifestation of infants' attentional capacities is associated with risk factors 
that are common in low-resource environments.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12761
PMID: 30315673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Dev Sci. 2019 Mar;22(2):e12750. doi: 10.1111/desc.12750. Epub 2018 Oct 2.

Gender differences in egalitarian behavior and attitudes in early childhood.

Benenson JF(1), Durosky A(1), Nguyen J(1), Crawford A(1), Gauthier E(2), Dubé 
É(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Emmanuel College, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Faculte des Sciences Humaines, Université du Québec à Montréal, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada.

It is axiomatic that human females are more egalitarian than males. However, 
surprisingly little empirical research exists that empirically assesses this 
stereotype. We created two studies designed to objectively examine egalitarian 
behavior in 3- to 5-year-old children. In Study 1 we compared the egalitarian 
behavior and attitudes of American girls versus boys by tabulating the extent to 
which each gender awarded the same number of stickers to, and liked to the same 
degree, two puppets. One puppet followed the child's instructions or actions 
while the other did not during a drawing task in which the child played the 
roles of leader and peer. In the peer role, girls exhibited more egalitarian 
behavior than boys. In Study 2, French-Canadian children were shown two drawings 
by unknown peers-one messily and one neatly colored-, then asked to distribute 
stickers to each peer's drawing. Again, girls exhibited more egalitarian 
behavior than boys. Results suggest the origins of gender differences in 
egalitarian behavior occur early in life and merit further investigation.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12750
PMID: 30176104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12817. doi: 10.1111/desc.12817. Epub 2019 Mar 13.

Habituation and novelty detection fNIRS brain responses in 5- and 8-month-old 
infants: The Gambia and UK.

Lloyd-Fox S(1)(2), Blasi A(3), McCann S(4), Rozhko M(3), Katus L(5), Mason L(1), 
Austin T(6), Moore SE(7), Elwell CE(3); BRIGHT project team.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Birkbeck University of London, 
London, UK.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Department of Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, University College 
London, London, UK.
(4)Medical Research Council, The Gambia at the London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(5)Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College London, 
London, UK.
(6)Department of Neonatology, The Rosie Hospital, Cambridge University Hospitals 
NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK.
(7)Department of Women and Children's Health, Kings College London, London, UK.

The first 1,000 days of life are a critical window of vulnerability to exposure 
to socioeconomic and health challenges (i.e. poverty/undernutrition). The Brain 
Imaging for Global Health (BRIGHT) project has been established to deliver 
longitudinal measures of brain development from 0 to 24 months in UK and Gambian 
infants and to assess the impact of early adversity. Here results from the 
Habituation-Novelty Detection (HaND) functional near-infrared spectroscopy 
(fNIRS) task at 5 and 8 months are presented (N = 62 UK; N = 115 Gambia). In the 
UK cohort distinct patterns of habituation and recovery of response to novelty 
are seen, becoming more robust from 5 to 8 months of age. In The Gambia, an 
attenuated habituation response is evident: a larger number of trials are 
required before the response sufficiently suppresses relative to the response 
during the first presented trials. Furthermore, recovery of response to novelty 
is not evident at 5 or 8 months of age. As this longitudinal study continues in 
The Gambia, the parallel collection of socioeconomic, caregiving, health and 
nutrition data will allow us to stratify how individual trajectories of 
habituation and recovery of response to novelty associate with different risk 
factors and adaptive mechanisms in greater depth. Given the increasing interest 
in the use of neuroimaging methods within global neurocognitive developmental 
studies, this study provides a novel cross-culturally appropriate paradigm for 
the study of brain responses associated with attention and learning mechanisms 
across early development.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12817
PMCID: PMC6767511
PMID: 30771264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Dev Sci. 2020 Jul;23(4):e12909. doi: 10.1111/desc.12909. Epub 2019 Nov 6.

First demonstration of effective spatial training for near transfer to spatial 
performance and far transfer to a range of mathematics skills at 8 years.

Gilligan KA(1)(2), Thomas MSC(3), Farran EK(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Surrey, Guilford, UK.
(2)Department of Psychology and Human Development, UCL Institute of Education, 
University College London, London, UK.
(3)Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London, London, 
UK.

There is evidence that spatial thinking is malleable, and that spatial and 
mathematical skills are associated (Mix et al. [2016] Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: General, 145, 1206; Mix et al. [2017] Journal of Cognition and 
Development, 18, 465; Uttal et al. [2013] Psychological Bulletin, 139, 352). 
However, few studies have investigated transfer of spatial training gains to 
mathematics outcomes in children, and no known studies have compared different 
modes of spatial instruction (explicit vs. implicit instruction). Based on a 
sample of 250 participants, this study compared the effectiveness of explicit 
and implicit spatial instruction in eliciting near transfer (to the specific 
spatial skills trained), intermediate transfer (to untrained spatial skills) and 
far transfer (to mathematics domains) at age 8. Spatial scaling and mental 
rotation skills were chosen as training targets as previous studies have found, 
and proposed explanations for, associations between these skills and mathematics 
in children of this age (Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 145, 2016 
and 1206). In this study, spatial training led to near, intermediate and far 
transfer of gains. Mental visualization and proportional reasoning were proposed 
to explain far transfer from mental rotation and spatial scaling skills 
respectively. For most outcomes, except for geometry, there was no difference in 
the effectiveness of implicit (practice with feedback) compared to explicit 
instruction (instructional videos). From a theoretical perspective, the study 
identified a specific causal effect of spatial skills on mathematics skills in 
children. Practically, the results also highlight the potential of instructional 
videos as a method of introducing spatial thinking into the classroom.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12909
PMCID: PMC7379338
PMID: 31599470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.


261. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12973. doi: 10.1111/desc.12973. Epub 2020 May 10.

Off to a good start: Early Spanish-language processing efficiency supports 
Spanish- and English-language outcomes at 4½ years in sequential bilinguals.

Marchman VA(1), Bermúdez VN(1), Bang JY(1), Fernald A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.

Many Latino children in the U.S. speak primarily Spanish at home with few 
opportunities for exposure to English before entering school. For monolingual 
children, the strongest early predictor of later school success is oral language 
skill developed before kindergarten. Less is known about how early oral language 
skills support later learning in sequential bilingual children. A question with 
wide-reaching significance is whether skill in a child's first language (L1) 
supports later learning in a second language (L2). In this longitudinal study of 
sequential Spanish-English bilinguals, we assessed oral language skills in 
Spanish at 2 years through parent reports of vocabulary size and children's 
real-time language processing efficiency (Accuracy, RT) in the 
'looking-while-listening' (LWL) task. At 4½ years, we assessed language outcomes 
in both Spanish and English using standardized tests. Reported relative exposure 
to each language was significantly correlated with language outcomes in Spanish 
and English. Within-language relations were observed between Spanish vocabulary 
size and processing efficiency at 2 years and later Spanish-language outcomes. 
Critically, across-language relations were also observed: Children with stronger 
Spanish-language processing efficiency at 2 years had stronger English-language 
skills at 4½ years, controlling for socioeconomic status and exposure to 
English. Children's early language processing efficiency in Spanish is 
associated with stronger real-time information processing skills that support 
maintenance of Spanish and learning in English when these children enter school. 
These results support the recommendation that primarily Spanish-speaking 
families should engage in activities that promote children's Spanish-language 
skills while also seeking opportunities for children to be exposed to English.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12973
PMID: 32320106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Dev Sci. 2019 Jul;22(4):e12783. doi: 10.1111/desc.12783. Epub 2019 Jan 18.

Learning to read facilitates the retrieval of phonological representations in 
rapid automatized naming: Evidence from unschooled illiterate, ex-illiterate, 
and schooled literate adults.

Araújo S(1), Fernandes T(1), Huettig F(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculdade de Psicologia, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Rapid automatized naming (RAN) of visual items is a powerful predictor of 
reading skills. However, the direction and locus of the association between RAN 
and reading is still largely unclear. Here, we investigated whether literacy 
acquisition directly bolsters RAN efficiency for objects, adopting a strong 
methodological design, by testing three groups of adults matched in age and 
socioeconomic variables, who differed only in literacy/schooling: unschooled 
illiterate and ex-illiterate, and schooled literate adults. To investigate in a 
fine-grained manner whether and how literacy facilitates lexical retrieval, we 
orthogonally manipulated the word-form frequency (high vs. low) and phonological 
neighborhood density (dense vs. spare) of the objects' names. We observed that 
literacy experience enhances the automaticity with which visual stimuli (e.g., 
objects) can be retrieved and named: relative to readers (ex-illiterate and 
literate), illiterate adults performed worse on RAN. Crucially, the group 
difference was exacerbated and significant only for those items that were of low 
frequency and from sparse neighborhoods. These results thus suggest that, 
regardless of schooling and age at which literacy was acquired, learning to read 
facilitates the access to and retrieval of phonological representations, 
especially of difficult lexical items.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12783
PMID: 30516315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2):e12531. doi: 10.1111/desc.12531. Epub 2017 Mar 12.

Neuroscientific insights into the development of analogical reasoning.

Whitaker KJ(1), Vendetti MS(2)(3), Wendelken C(2)(4), Bunge SA(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Brain Mapping Unit, Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, UK.
(2)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California at Berkeley, 
USA.
(3)Oracle Corporation, Redwood City, California, USA.
(4)Vicarious FPC, Inc, Union City, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of California at Berkeley, USA.

Analogical reasoning, or the ability to find correspondences between entities 
based on shared relationships, supports knowledge acquisition. As such, the 
development of this ability during childhood is thought to promote learning. 
Here, we sought to better understand the mechanisms by which analogical 
reasoning about semantic relations improves over childhood and adolescence (e.g. 
chalk is to chalkboard as pen is to…?). We hypothesized that age-related 
differences would manifest as differences in the brain regions associated with 
one or more of the following cognitive functions: (1) controlled semantic 
retrieval, or the ability to retrieve task-relevant semantic associations; (2) 
response control, or the ability to override the tendency to respond to a 
salient distractor; and/or (3) relational integration, or the ability to 
consider jointly two mental relations. In order to test these hypotheses, we 
analyzed patterns of fMRI activation during performance of a pictorial 
propositional analogy task across 95 typically developing children between the 
ages of 6 and 18 years old. Despite large age-related differences in task 
performance, particularly over ages 6-10 but through to around age 14, 
participants across the whole age range recruited a common network of frontal, 
parietal and temporal regions. However, activation in a brain region that has 
been implicated in controlled semantic retrieval - left anterior prefrontal 
cortex (BA 47/45) - was positively correlated with age, and also with 
performance after controlling for age. This finding indicates that improved 
performance over middle childhood and early adolescence on this analogical 
reasoning task is driven largely by improvements in the ability to selectively 
retrieve task-relevant semantic relationships.

© 2017 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12531
PMCID: PMC5887920
PMID: 28295877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12568. doi: 10.1111/desc.12568. Epub 2017 May 30.

The influence of pubertal maturation on antisaccade performance.

Ordaz SJ(1), Fritz BL(2), Forbes EE(2), Luna B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 
USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Adolescence is a period characterized by continued improvements in inhibitory 
control, and this persisting immaturity is believed to interact with 
affective/motivational behavior to generate the impulsive and risk-taking 
behavior evidenced at this time. Puberty is a central event of adolescence that 
has been shown to influence affective/motivational behavior. However, despite 
plausible mechanisms by which puberty might influence inhibitory control, 
researchers have yet to test this possibility rigorously. Thus, we designed a 
study to examine the unique role of pubertal maturation, independent of age, in 
the development of inhibitory control. In order to minimize age-related 
variability while maximizing pubertal status variability, we recruited 78 
participants (34 F) whose ages narrowly spanned the mean age of gonadarche for 
each sex (F: ages 11-13, M: ages 12-14). Two complementary measures were used to 
assess pubertal status: (1) circulating blood serum testosterone and estradiol 
levels reflecting internal manifestations of pubertal maturation, and (2) Tanner 
staging by a trained nurse reflecting pubertal maturation's external 
manifestations. Inhibitory control was assessed using the antisaccade task, and 
findings were adjusted for the potential effect of age. Results revealed no 
association between testosterone levels and error rates or response latencies in 
either sex. In girls, estradiol levels were not associated with error rates, but 
were associated with faster response latencies. There was similarly no 
association between Tanner status and error rates, although girls in more 
advanced pubertal stages showed faster response latencies. Power analyses 
indicate that findings of a lack of association did not reflect limited 
statistical power. Thus, in a study designed to isolate the effects of pubertal 
maturation independent of age, both external and internal indices of pubertal 
maturation converged to indicate that age-related improvements in cold 
antisaccade performance are independent of pubertal maturation.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12568
PMCID: PMC5709236
PMID: 28557196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12663. doi: 10.1111/desc.12663. Epub 2018 Mar 22.

Eighteen-month-olds selectively generalize words from accurate speakers to novel 
contexts.

Luchkina E(1), Sobel DM(1), Morgan JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive, Linguistic and Psychological Sciences, Brown 
University, Providence, RI, USA.

The present studies examine whether and how 18-month-olds use informants' 
accuracy to acquire novel labels for novel objects and generalize them to a new 
context. In Experiment 1, two speakers made statements about the labels of 
familiar objects. One used accurate labels and the other used inaccurate labels. 
One of these speakers then introduced novel labels for two novel objects. At 
test, toddlers saw those two novel objects and heard an unfamiliar voice say one 
of the labels provided by the speaker. Only toddlers who had heard the novel 
labels introduced by the accurate speaker looked at the appropriate novel object 
above chance. Experiment 2 explored possible mechanisms underlying this 
difference in generalization. Rather than making statements about familiar 
objects' labels, both speakers asked questions about the objects' labels, with 
one speaker using accurate labels and the other using inaccurate labels. 
Toddlers' generalization of novel labels for novel objects was at chance for 
both speakers, suggesting that toddlers do not simply associate hearing the 
accurate label with the reliability of the speaker. We discuss these results in 
terms of potential mechanisms by which children learn and generalize novel 
labels across contexts from speaker reliability.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12663
PMCID: PMC6151175
PMID: 29569386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12718. doi: 10.1111/desc.12718. Epub 2018 Sep 2.

Gender equality in 4- to 5-year-old preschoolers' early numerical competencies.

Bakker M(1)(2), Torbeyns J(1), Wijns N(1), Verschaffel L(1), De Smedt B(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Instructional Psychology and Technology, Faculty of Psychology and 
Educational Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Parenting and Special Education Research Unit, Faculty of Psychology and 
Educational Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Numerical competencies acquired in preschool are foundational and predictive for 
children's later mathematical development. It remains to be determined whether 
there are gender differences in these early numerical competencies which could 
explain the often-reported gender differences in later mathematics and 
STEM-related abilities. Using a Bayesian approach, we quantified the evidence in 
favor of the alternative hypothesis of gender differences versus the null 
hypothesis of gender equality. Participants were 402 4- to 5-year-old children 
attending preschool in Flanders (Belgium). Children were selected via stratified 
cluster sampling to represent the full range of socioeconomic backgrounds. All 
children completed eight numerical tasks (verbal counting, object counting, 
numeral recognition, symbolic comparison, nonsymbolic comparison, nonverbal 
calculation, number order, dot enumeration). Results supported the gender 
equality hypothesis, and this evidence was substantial for seven of the eight 
numerical tasks. Preschoolers' early numerical competencies are characterized by 
gender equality. They probably do not explain later-reported gender differences.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12718
PMID: 30175533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12724. doi: 10.1111/desc.12724. Epub 2018 Oct 12.

What Do North American Babies Hear? A large-scale cross-corpus analysis.

Bergelson E(1), Casillas M(2), Soderstrom M(3), Seidl A(4), Warlaumont AS(5), 
Amatuni A(1).

Author information:
(1)Psychology & Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina.
(2)Language Development Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Psychology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(4)Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, 
Indiana.
(5)Communication, University of California, Los Angeles, California.

A range of demographic variables influences how much speech young children hear. 
However, because studies have used vastly different sampling methods, 
quantitative comparison of interlocking demographic effects has been nearly 
impossible, across or within studies. We harnessed a unique collection of 
existing naturalistic, day-long recordings from 61 homes across four North 
American cities to examine language input as a function of age, gender, and 
maternal education. We analyzed adult speech heard by 3- to 20-month-olds who 
wore audio recorders for an entire day. We annotated speaker gender and speech 
register (child-directed or adult-directed) for 10,861 utterances from female 
and male adults in these recordings. Examining age, gender, and maternal 
education collectively in this ecologically valid dataset, we find several key 
results. First, the speaker gender imbalance in the input is striking: children 
heard 2-3× more speech from females than males. Second, children in 
higher-maternal education homes heard more child-directed speech than those in 
lower-maternal education homes. Finally, our analyses revealed a previously 
unreported effect: the proportion of child-directed speech in the input 
increases with age, due to a decrease in adult-directed speech with age. This 
large-scale analysis is an important step forward in collectively examining 
demographic variables that influence early development, made possible by pooled, 
comparable, day-long recordings of children's language environments. The audio 
recordings, annotations, and annotation software are readily available for reuse 
and reanalysis by other researchers.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12724
PMCID: PMC6294666
PMID: 30369005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12694. doi: 10.1111/desc.12694. Epub 2018 Jun 19.

Monozygotic twin differences in school performance are stable and systematic.

von Stumm S(1), Plomin R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Behavioural Science, London School of 
Economics and Political Science (LSE), London, UK.
(2)SGDP Research Centre, King's College London (KCL), Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology and Neuroscience (IoPPN), London, UK.

School performance is one of the most stable and heritable psychological 
characteristics. Notwithstanding, monozygotic twins (MZ), who have identical 
genotypes, differ in school performance. These MZ differences result from 
non-shared environments that do not contribute to the similarity within twin 
pairs. Because to date few non-shared environmental factors have been reliably 
associated with MZ differences in school performance, they are thought to be 
idiosyncratic and due to chance, suggesting that the effect of non-shared 
environments on MZ differences are age- and trait-specific. In a sample of 2768 
MZ twin pairs, we found first that MZ differences in school performance were 
moderately stable from age 12 through 16, with differences at the ages 12 and 14 
accounting for 20% of the variance in MZ differences at age 16. Second, MZ 
differences in school performance correlated positively with MZ differences 
across 16 learning-related variables, including measures of intelligence, 
personality and school attitudes, with the twin who scored higher on one also 
scoring higher on the other measures. Finally, MZ differences in the 16 
learning-related variables accounted for 22% of the variance in MZ differences 
in school performance at age 16. These findings suggest that, unlike for other 
psychological domains, non-shared environmental factors affect school 
performance in systematic ways that have long-term and generalist influence. Our 
findings should motivate the search for non-shared environmental factors 
responsible for the stable and systematic effects on children's differences in 
school performance. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at: 
https://youtu.be/0bw2Fl_HGq0.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12694
PMCID: PMC6202166
PMID: 29920866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12539. Epub 2017 Feb 21.

Young children perceive less humanness in outgroup faces.

McLoughlin N(1), Tipper SP(1), Over H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of York, UK.

We investigated when young children first dehumanize outgroups. Across two 
studies, 5- and 6-year-olds were asked to rate how human they thought a set of 
ambiguous doll-human face morphs were. We manipulated whether these faces 
belonged to their gender in- or gender outgroup (Study 1) and to a 
geographically based in- or outgroup (Study 2). In both studies, the tendency to 
perceive outgroup faces as less human relative to ingroup faces increased with 
age. Explicit ingroup preference, in contrast, was present even in the youngest 
children and remained stable across age. These results demonstrate that children 
dehumanize outgroup members from relatively early in development and suggest 
that the tendency to do so may be partially distinguishable from intergroup 
preference. This research has important implications for our understanding of 
children's perception of humanness and the origins of intergroup bias.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12539
PMID: 28224682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e13017. doi: 10.1111/desc.13017. Epub 2020 Aug 12.

The value of proactive goal setting and choice in 3- to 7-year-olds' use of 
working memory gating strategies in a naturalistic task.

Freier L(1), Gupta P(1), Badre D(1)(2), Amso D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, and Psychological Science, Brown 
University, Providence, RI, USA.
(2)Brown Institute for Brain Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.
(3)Psychology Department, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.

Rule-guided behavior depends on the ability to strategically update and act on 
content held in working memory. Proactive and reactive control strategies were 
contrasted across two experiments using an adapted input/output gating paradigm 
(Neuron, 81, 2014 and 930). Behavioral accuracies of 3-, 5-, and 7-year-olds 
were higher when a contextual cue appeared at the beginning of the task (input 
gating) rather than at the end (output gating). This finding supports prior work 
in older children, suggesting that children are better when input gating but 
rely on the more effortful output gating strategy for goal-oriented action 
selection (Cognition, 155, 2016 and 8). A manipulation was added to investigate 
whether children's use of working memory strategies becomes more flexible when 
task goals are specified internally rather than externally provided by the 
experimenter. A shift toward more proactive control was observed when children 
chose the task goal among two alternatives. Scan path analyses of saccadic eye 
movement indicated that giving children agency and choice over the task goal 
resulted in less use of a reactive strategy than when the goal was determined by 
the experimenter.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13017
PMID: 32654276


271. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12587. doi: 10.1111/desc.12587. Epub 2017 Jul 18.

Memory in 3-month-old infants benefits from a short nap.

Horváth K(1)(2), Hannon B(1), Ujma PP(3), Gombos F(4), Plunkett K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)2nd Department of Pediatrics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(3)Institute for Behavioral Sciences, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(4)Department of Developmental and Social Psychology, Pázmány Péter Catholic 
University, Budapest, Hungary.

A broad range of studies demonstrate that sleep has a facilitating role in 
memory consolidation (see Rasch & Born, ). Whether sleep-dependent memory 
consolidation is also apparent in infants in their first few months of life has 
not been investigated. We demonstrate that 3-month-old infants only remember a 
cartoon face approximately 1.5-2 hours after its first presentation when a 
period of sleep followed learning. Furthermore, habituation time, that is, the 
time to become bored with a stimulus shown repetitively, correlated negatively 
with the density of infant sleep spindles, implying that processing speed is 
linked to specific electroencephalographic components of sleep. Our findings 
show that without a short period of sleep infants have problems remembering a 
newly seen face, that sleep enhances memory consolidation from a very early age, 
highlighting the importance of napping in infancy, and that infant sleep 
spindles may be associated with some aspects of cognitive ability.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12587
PMID: 28722249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12549. Epub 2017 Feb 21.

Acquisition of abstract concepts is influenced by emotional valence.

Ponari M(1), Norbury CF(2), Vigliocco G(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Kent, Canterbury, Kent, UK.
(2)Royal Holloway, University of London, Egham, Surrey, UK.
(3)Department of Experimental Psychology, University College London, London, UK.

There is considerable lack of evidence concerning the linguistic and cognitive 
skills underpinning abstract vocabulary acquisition. The present study considers 
the role of emotional valence in providing an embodied learning experience in 
which to anchor abstract meanings. First, analyses of adult ratings of 
age-of-acquisition, concreteness and valence demonstrate that abstract words 
acquired early tend to be emotionally valenced. Second, auditory Lexical 
Decision accuracies of children aged 6-7, 8-9, and 10-11 years (n = 20 per 
group) complement these analyses, demonstrating that emotional valence 
facilitates processing of abstract words, but not concrete. These findings 
provide the first evidence that young, school-aged children are sensitive to 
emotional valence and that this facilitates acquisition of abstract words.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12549
PMID: 28224689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Dev Sci. 2019 Jul;22(4):e12800. doi: 10.1111/desc.12800. Epub 2019 Feb 18.

The role of executive function and social-emotional skills in the development of 
literacy and numeracy during preschool: a cross-lagged longitudinal study.

Wolf S(1), McCoy DC(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Education, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania.
(2)Graduate School of Education, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

The majority of evidence on the interplay between academic and non-academic 
skills comes from high-income countries. The aim of this study was to examine 
the bidirectional associations between Ghanaian children's executive function, 
social-emotional, literacy, and numeracy skills longitudinally. Children 
(N = 3,862; M age = 5.2 years at time 1) were assessed using direct assessment 
at three time points over the course of two school years. Controlling for 
earlier levels of the same skill, early executive function predicted higher 
subsequent literacy and numeracy skills, and early literacy and numeracy skills 
predicted higher subsequent executive function, indicating that the development 
of executive function and academic skills is inter-related and complementary 
over time. Early literacy and numeracy predicted subsequent social-emotional 
skills, but early social-emotional skills did not predict subsequent literacy 
and numeracy skills. The findings provide longitudinal evidence on children's 
learning and development in West Africa and contribute to a global understanding 
of the relations between various developmental skills over time.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12800
PMID: 30666761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12672. doi: 10.1111/desc.12672. Epub 2018 Apr 16.

Real-time lexical comprehension in young children learning American Sign 
Language.

MacDonald K(1), LaMarr T(2), Corina D(2), Marchman VA(1), Fernald A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA.
(2)Center for Mind and Brain, UC Davis, Davis, California, USA.

When children interpret spoken language in real time, linguistic information 
drives rapid shifts in visual attention to objects in the visual world. This 
language-vision interaction can provide insights into children's developing 
efficiency in language comprehension. But how does language influence visual 
attention when the linguistic signal and the visual world are both processed via 
the visual channel? Here, we measured eye movements during real-time 
comprehension of a visual-manual language, American Sign Language (ASL), by 29 
native ASL-learning children (16-53 mos, 16 deaf, 13 hearing) and 16 fluent deaf 
adult signers. All signers showed evidence of rapid, incremental language 
comprehension, tending to initiate an eye movement before sign offset. Deaf and 
hearing ASL-learners showed similar gaze patterns, suggesting that the 
in-the-moment dynamics of eye movements during ASL processing are shaped by the 
constraints of processing a visual language in real time and not by differential 
access to auditory information in day-to-day life. Finally, variation in 
children's ASL processing was positively correlated with age and vocabulary 
size. Thus, despite competition for attention within a single modality, the 
timing and accuracy of visual fixations during ASL comprehension reflect 
information processing skills that are important for language acquisition 
regardless of language modality.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12672
PMCID: PMC6191391
PMID: 29659103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Dev Sci. 2018 Jan;21(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12504. Epub 2016 Dec 18.

Audio-visual speech in noise perception in dyslexia.

van Laarhoven T(1), Keetels M(1), Schakel L(1), Vroomen J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Neuropsychology, Tilburg University, Tilburg, The 
Netherlands.

Individuals with developmental dyslexia (DD) may experience, besides reading 
problems, other speech-related processing deficits. Here, we examined the 
influence of visual articulatory information (lip-read speech) at various levels 
of background noise on auditory word recognition in children and adults with DD. 
We found that children with a documented history of DD have deficits in their 
ability to gain benefit from lip-read information that disambiguates 
noise-masked speech. We show with another group of adult individuals with DD 
that these deficits persist into adulthood. These deficits could not be 
attributed to impairments in unisensory auditory word recognition. Rather, the 
results indicate a specific deficit in audio-visual speech processing and 
suggest that impaired multisensory integration might be an important aspect of 
DD.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12504
PMID: 27990724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Dev Sci. 2019 May;22(3):e12771. doi: 10.1111/desc.12771. Epub 2018 Dec 4.

The role of sensorimotor experience in the development of mimicry in infancy.

de Klerk CCJM(1), Lamy-Yang I(1)(2), Southgate V(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Birkbeck College, University of 
London, London, UK.
(2)School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Wales, UK.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

During social interactions we often have an automatic and unconscious tendency 
to copy or 'mimic' others' actions. The dominant view on the neural basis of 
mimicry appeals to an automatic coupling between perception and action. It has 
been suggested that this coupling is formed through associative learning during 
correlated sensorimotor experience. Although studies with adult participants 
have provided support for this hypothesis, little is known about the role of 
sensorimotor experience in supporting the development of perceptual-motor 
couplings, and consequently mimicry behaviour, in infancy. Here we investigated 
whether the extent to which an observed action elicits mimicry depends on the 
opportunity an infant has had to develop perceptual-motor couplings for this 
action through correlated sensorimotor experience. We found that mothers' 
tendency to imitate their 4-month-olds' facial expressions during a parent-child 
interaction session was related to infants' facial mimicry as measured by 
electromyography. Maternal facial imitation was not related to infants' mimicry 
of hand actions, and instead we found preliminary evidence that infants' 
tendency to look at their own hands may be related to their tendency to mimic 
hand actions. These results are consistent with the idea that mimicry is 
supported by perceptual-motor couplings that are formed through correlated 
sensorimotor experience obtained by observing one's own actions and imitative 
social partners.

© 2018 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12771
PMCID: PMC6767077
PMID: 30415485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.


277. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12709. doi: 10.1111/desc.12709. Epub 2018 Aug 19.

Is there a direct relation between the development of vocabulary and grammar?

Brinchmann EI(1), Braeken J(2), Lyster SH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Special Needs Education, University of Oslo, Norway.
(2)Centre for Educational Measurement, University of Oslo, Norway.

Previous studies of individual differences have revealed strong correlations 
between children's vocabulary and grammatical abilities, and these data have 
been used to support theoretical accounts positing direct developmental 
relations between these two areas of language. However, between-person 
differences do not necessarily reflect intra-individual dynamics. Thus, in the 
present study, we analysed longitudinal data from three annual assessments of 
vocabulary and grammar in 217 children (Mage = 4 years and 3 months at first 
assessment) using a modelling strategy with some utility in distinguishing 
relations at the between- and within-person levels. The results revealed strong 
correlations between grammar and vocabulary at the between-person level, but the 
evidence of direct dependencies between the variables at the within-person level 
was rather limited. Specifically, we found a small direct contribution from 
grammar to vocabulary for children between the ages of 4 and 5, but there was no 
evidence of any direct contributions from vocabulary to grammar. Further 
analyses suggested that the home literacy environment may represent a common 
source of individual differences in children's vocabulary and grammatical 
skills. In light of these results, we argue that the evidence of direct 
relations between vocabulary and grammatical development in preschool-aged 
children may not be as strong as previously assumed.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12709
PMID: 30124236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Dev Sci. 2020 Jan;23(1):e12843. doi: 10.1111/desc.12843. Epub 2019 May 27.

Infants' intentionally communicative vocalizations elicit responses from 
caregivers and are the best predictors of the transition to language: A 
longitudinal investigation of infants' vocalizations, gestures and word 
production.

Donnellan E(1), Bannard C(2), McGillion ML(3), Slocombe KE(4), Matthews D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
(2)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of York, York, UK.

What aspects of infants' prelinguistic communication are most valuable for 
learning to speak, and why? We test whether early vocalizations and gestures 
drive the transition to word use because, in addition to indicating motoric 
readiness, they (a) are early instances of intentional communication and (b) 
elicit verbal responses from caregivers. In study 1, 11 month olds (N = 134) 
were observed to coordinate vocalizations and gestures with gaze to their 
caregiver's face at above chance rates, indicating that they are plausibly 
intentionally communicative. Study 2 tested whether those infant communicative 
acts that were gaze-coordinated best predicted later expressive vocabulary. We 
report a novel procedure for predicting vocabulary via multi-model inference 
over a comprehensive set of infant behaviours produced at 11 and 12 months 
(n = 58). This makes it possible to establish the relative predictive value of 
different behaviours that are hierarchically organized by level of granularity. 
Gaze-coordinated vocalizations were the most valuable predictors of expressive 
vocabulary size up to 24 months. Study 3 established that caregivers were more 
likely to respond to gaze-coordinated behaviours. Moreover, the dyadic 
combination of infant gaze-coordinated vocalization and caregiver response was 
by far the best predictor of later vocabulary size. We conclude that practice 
with prelinguistic intentional communication facilitates the leap to symbol use. 
Learning is optimized when caregivers respond to intentional vocalizations with 
appropriate language.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12843
PMID: 31045301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12841. doi: 10.1111/desc.12841. Epub 2019 May 29.

The relationship between biological and psychosocial risk factors and 
resting-state functional connectivity in 2-month-old Bangladeshi infants: A 
feasibility and pilot study.

Turesky TK(1)(2), Jensen SKG(1)(2), Yu X(1)(2), Kumar S(1), Wang Y(1)(2)(3), 
Sliva DD(1)(4), Gagoski B(1)(2), Sanfilippo J(1), Zöllei L(5), Boyd E(5), Haque 
R(6), Hafiz Kakon S(6), Islam N(7), Petri WA Jr(8), Nelson CA(1)(2)(9), Gaab 
N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratories of Cognitive Neuroscience, Division of Developmental Medicine, 
Department of Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)College of Education and Human Sciences, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 
Lincoln, Nebraska.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island.
(5)A.A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts.
(6)The International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(7)National Institute of Neurosciences & Hospital, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(8)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of 
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia.
(9)Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Childhood poverty has been associated with structural and functional alterations 
in the developing brain. However, poverty does not alter brain development 
directly, but acts through associated biological or psychosocial risk factors 
(e.g. malnutrition, family conflict). Yet few studies have investigated risk 
factors in the context of infant neurodevelopment, and none have done so in 
low-resource settings such as Bangladesh, where children are exposed to 
multiple, severe biological and psychosocial hazards. In this feasibility and 
pilot study, usable resting-state fMRI data were acquired in infants from 
extremely poor (n = 16) and (relatively) more affluent (n = 16) families in 
Dhaka, Bangladesh. Whole-brain intrinsic functional connectivity (iFC) was 
estimated using bilateral seeds in the amygdala, where iFC has shown 
susceptibility to early life stress, and in sensory areas, which have exhibited 
less susceptibility to early life hazards. Biological and psychosocial risk 
factors were examined for associations with iFC. Three resting-state networks 
were identified in within-group brain maps: medial temporal/striatal, visual, 
and auditory networks. Infants from extremely poor families compared with those 
from more affluent families exhibited greater (i.e. less negative) iFC in 
precuneus for amygdala seeds; however, no group differences in iFC were observed 
for sensory area seeds. Height-for-age, a proxy for malnutrition/infection, was 
not associated with amygdala/precuneus iFC, whereas prenatal family conflict was 
positively correlated. Findings suggest that it is feasible to conduct infant 
fMRI studies in low-resource settings. Challenges and practical steps for 
successful implementations are discussed.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12841
PMCID: PMC6713583
PMID: 31016808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12954. doi: 10.1111/desc.12954. Epub 2020 Mar 10.

The developing predictive brain: How implicit temporal expectancy induced by 
local and global prediction shapes action preparation across development.

Mento G(1), Granziol U(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Psychology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.

Human behavior is continuously shaped not just as a function of explicitly 
responding to external world events but also by internal biases implicitly 
driven by the capacity to extract statistics from complex sensory patterns. Two 
possible sources of predictability engaged to generate and update temporal 
expectancy are the implicit extraction of either local or global statistical 
contingencies in the events' temporal structure. In the context of action 
preparation the local prediction has been reported to be stable from the age of 
6. However, there is no evidence about how the ability to extract and use global 
statistical patterns to establish temporal expectancy changes across 
development. Here we used a new, child-friendly reaction time task purposely 
designed to investigate how local (within-trial expectancy bias) and global 
(between-block expectancy bias) prediction interplay to generate temporal 
expectancy and consequently shape action preparation in young (5- to 
6-year-old), middle-aged (7- to 8-year-old) and old (9- to 10-year-old) 
typically developing children. We found that while local temporal prediction 
showed stable developmental trajectories, the ability to use a global rule to 
action preparation in terms of both accuracy and speed becomes stable after the 
age of seven. These findings are discussed by adopting a 
neuroconstructivist-inspired theoretical account, according to which the 
developmental constraints on learning from hierarchically nested levels of 
sensory complexity may constitute a necessary prerequisite for mastering complex 
domains.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12954
PMID: 32080951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):1111-1118. doi: 10.1111/desc.12389. Epub 2016 Feb 21.

Bodily maps of emotions across child development.

Hietanen JK(1), Glerean E(2), Hari R(2), Nummenmaa L(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Human Information Processing Laboratory, School of Social Sciences and 
Humanities/Psychology, University of Tampere, Finland. jari.hietanen@uta.fi.
(2)Department of Neuroscience and Biomedical Engineering, School of Science, 
Aalto University, Finland.
(3)Turku PET Centre and Department of Psychology, University of Turku, Finland.

Different basic emotions (anger, fear, disgust, happiness, sadness, and 
surprise) are consistently associated with distinct bodily sensation maps, which 
may underlie subjectively felt emotions. Here we investigated the development of 
bodily sensations associated with basic emotions in 6- to 17-year-old children 
and adolescents (n = 331). Children as young as 6 years of age associated 
statistically discernible, discrete patterns of bodily sensations with 
happiness, fear, and surprise, as well as with emotional neutrality. The bodily 
sensation maps changed from less to more specific, adult-like patterns as a 
function of age. We conclude that emotion-related bodily sensations become 
increasingly discrete over child development. Developing awareness of their 
emotion-related bodily sensations may shape the way children perceive, label, 
and interpret emotions.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12389
PMID: 26898716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov 20:e13065. doi: 10.1111/desc.13065. Online ahead of print.

Remediation of a phonological representation deficit in Chinese children with 
dyslexia: A comparison between metalinguistic training and working memory 
training.

Wang J(1), Wu KC(2), Mo J(2), Wong WL(2), Siu TSC(3), McBride C(2)(4), Chung 
KKH(3), Wong PCM(4)(5), Maurer U(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The Education University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 
S.A.R., China.
(2)Department of Psychology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 
S.A.R., China.
(3)Department of Early Childhood Education, The Education University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong S.A.R., China.
(4)Brain and Mind Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 
S.A.R., China.
(5)Department of Linguistics and Modern Languages, The Chinese University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong S.A.R., China.

A form-preparation task in the language production field was adopted to examine 
output phonological representations in Chinese dyslexia and their susceptibility 
to training. Forty-one Chinese children with dyslexia (7-11 years old) and 36 
chronological age controls completed this task. The controls demonstrated a 
marginally significant syllable facilitation effect (d = -0.13), indicating 
their use of syllable-sized phonological representations during speech 
production, while the group with dyslexia showed a significantly different 
pattern (d = 0.04), opposite to the direction of a facilitation effect. The 
children with dyslexia were then randomly assigned to either metalinguistic 
training (N = 22) or working memory training (N = 19). Only the metalinguistic 
training subgroup demonstrated a significant syllable facilitation effect 
afterward (metalinguistic: d = -0.13; working memory: d = -0.01). The results 
suggest the presence of a phonological representation deficit at the syllable 
level in Chinese dyslexia and its possible remediation by metalinguistic 
training. Such a phonological deficit in readers of a logographic script 
strongly supports the impaired phonological representation view of developmental 
dyslexia. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at 
https://youtu.be/zT2Be0xMkh0.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13065
PMID: 33217109


283. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12580. doi: 10.1111/desc.12580. Epub 2017 Jun 20.

Young children seek out biased information about social groups.

Over H(1), Eggleston A(1), Bell J(1), Dunham Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of York, York, UK.
(2)Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.

Understanding the origins of prejudice necessitates exploring the ways in which 
children participate in the construction of biased representations of social 
groups. We investigate whether young children actively seek out information that 
supports and extends their initial intergroup biases. In Studies 1 and 2, we 
show that children choose to hear a story that contains positive information 
about their own group and negative information about another group rather than a 
story that contains negative information about their own group and positive 
information about the other group. In a third study, we show that children 
choose to present biased information to others, thus demonstrating that the 
effects of information selection can start to propagate through social networks. 
In Studies 4 and 5, we further investigate the nature of children's selective 
information seeking and show that children prefer ingroup-favouring information 
to other types of biased information and even to balanced, unbiased information. 
Together, this work shows that children are not merely passively recipients of 
social information; they play an active role in the creation and transmission of 
intergroup attitudes.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12580
PMID: 28631413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Dev Sci. 2018 Jan;21(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12509. Epub 2017 Feb 22.

How does social essentialism affect the development of inter-group relations?

Rhodes M(1), Leslie SJ(2), Saunders K(1), Dunham Y(3), Cimpian A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, New York University, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Philosophy, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.

Psychological essentialism is a pervasive conceptual bias to view categories as 
reflecting something deep, stable, and informative about their members. Scholars 
from diverse disciplines have long theorized that psychological essentialism has 
negative ramifications for inter-group relations, yet little previous empirical 
work has experimentally tested the social implications of essentialist beliefs. 
Three studies (N = 127, ages 4.5-6) found that experimentally inducing 
essentialist beliefs about a novel social category led children to share fewer 
resources with category members, but did not lead to the out-group dislike that 
defines social prejudice. These findings indicate that essentialism negatively 
influences some key components of inter-group relations, but does not lead 
directly to the development of prejudice.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12509
PMID: 28229563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12717. doi: 10.1111/desc.12717. Epub 2018 Aug 14.

Developmental patterns of change in the influence of safe and risky peer choices 
on risky decision-making.

Braams BR(1), Davidow JY(1), Somerville LH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Adolescents take more risks when peers monitor their behavior. However, it is 
largely unknown how different types of peer influence affect adolescent 
decision-making. In this study, we investigate how information about previous 
choices of peers differentially influences decision-making in adolescence and 
young adulthood. Participants (N = 99, age range 12-22) completed an economic 
choice task in which choice options were systematically varied on levels of risk 
and ambiguity. On each trial, participants selected between a safer choice (low 
variability in outcome) and a riskier choice (high variability in outcome). 
Participants made choices in three conditions: a solo condition in which they 
made choices with no additional information, a social condition in which they 
saw choices of supposed peers, and a computer condition in which they saw 
choices of a computer. Results showed that participants' choices conform to the 
choices made by the peers, but not a computer. Furthermore, when peers chose the 
safe option, late adolescents were especially likely to make a safe choice. 
Conversely, when the peer made a risky choice, late adolescents were least 
likely to follow choices made by the peer. We did not find evidence for 
differential influence of social information on decisions depending on their 
level of risk and ambiguity. These results show that information about previous 
decisions of peers are a powerful modifier for behavior and that the effect of 
peers on adolescents' decisions is less ubiquitous and more specific than 
previously assumed.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12717
PMID: 30105854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Dev Sci. 2017 Jan;20(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12454.

Reading comprehension and immersion schooling: evidence from component skills.

Hansen LB(1), Morales J(1), Macizo P(1), Duñabeitia JA(2), Saldaña D(3), 
Carreiras M(2)(4)(5), Fuentes LJ(6), Bajo MT(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigación Mente, Cerebro y Comportamiento (CIMCYC), Universidad 
de Granada, Spain.
(2)Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language (BCBL), Spain.
(3)Department of Developmental and Educational Psychology, Universidad de 
Sevilla, Spain.
(4)Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, Spain.
(5)Universidad del País Vasco, Spain.
(6)Department of Basic Psychology, Universidad de Murcia, Spain.

The present research aims to assess literacy acquisition in children becoming 
bilingual via second language immersion in school. We adopt a cognitive 
components approach, assessing text-level reading comprehension, a complex 
literacy skill, as well as underlying cognitive and linguistic components in 144 
children aged 7 to 14 (72 immersion bilinguals, 72 controls). Using principal 
component analysis, a nuanced pattern of results was observed: although emergent 
bilinguals lag behind their monolingual counterparts on measures of linguistic 
processing, they showed enhanced performance on a memory and reasoning 
component. For reading comprehension, no between-group differences were evident, 
suggesting that selective benefits compensate costs at the level of underlying 
cognitive components. Overall, the results seem to indicate that literacy skills 
may be modulated by emerging bilingualism even when no between-group differences 
are evident at the level of complex skill, and the detection of such differences 
may depend on the focus and selectivity of the task battery used.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12454
PMID: 28032442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e13007. doi: 10.1111/desc.13007. Epub 2020 Jul 6.

Moving attention along the mental number line in preschool age: Study of the 
operational momentum in 3- to 5-year-old children's non-symbolic arithmetic.

Haman M(1), Lipowska K(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Psychology, University of Warsaw, Warszawa, Poland.

People tend to underestimate subtraction and overestimate addition outcomes and 
to associate subtraction with the left side and addition with the right side. 
These two phenomena are collectively labeled 'operational momentum' (OM) and 
thought to have their origins in the same mechanism of 'moving attention along 
the mental number line'. OM in arithmetic has never been tested in children at 
the preschool age, which is critical for numerical development. In this study, 
3-5 years old were tested with non-symbolic addition and subtraction tasks. 
Their level of understanding of counting principles (CP) was assessed using the 
give-a-number task. When the second operand's cardinality was 5 or 6 (Experiment 
1), the child's reaction time was shorter in addition/subtraction tasks after 
cuing attention appropriately to the right/left. Adding/subtracting one element 
(Experiment 2) revealed a more complex developmental pattern. Before acquiring 
CP, the children showed generalized overestimation bias. Underestimation in 
addition and overestimation in subtraction emerged only after mastering CP. No 
clear spatial-directional OM pattern was found, however, the response time to 
rightward/leftward cues in addition/subtraction again depended on stage of 
mastering CP. Although the results support the hypothesis about engagement of 
spatial attention in early numerical processing, they point to at least partial 
independence of the spatial-directional and magnitude OM. This undermines the 
canonical version of the number line-based hypothesis. Mapping numerical 
magnitudes to space may be a complex process that undergoes reorganization 
during the period of acquisition of symbolic representations of numbers. Some 
hypotheses concerning the role of spatial-numerical associations in numerical 
development are proposed.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13007
PMID: 32567767


288. Dev Sci. 2020 Jan;23(1):e12860. doi: 10.1111/desc.12860. Epub 2019 Jun 14.

The development of executive function in early childhood is inversely related to 
change in body mass index: Evidence for an energetic tradeoff?

Blair C(1)(2), Kuzawa CW(3), Willoughby MT(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Psychology, New York University, New York, New York.
(2)Department of Population Health, New York University School of Medicine, New 
York, New York.
(3)Department of Anthropology and Institute for Policy Research, Northwestern 
University, Evanston, Illinois.
(4)Education and Workforce Development, RTI International, Research Triangle 
Park, North Carolina.

A well-established literature demonstrates executive function (EF) deficits in 
obese children and adults relative to healthy weight comparisons. EF deficits in 
obesity are associated with overeating and impulsive consumption of high calorie 
foods leading to excess weight gain and to problems with metabolic regulation 
and low-grade inflammation that detrimentally affect the structure and function 
of prefrontal cortex. Here, we test a complementary explanation for the relation 
between EF and body mass index (BMI) grounded in the energy demand of the 
developing brain. Recent work shows that the brain accounts for a lifetime peak 
of 66% of resting metabolic rate in childhood and that developmental changes in 
brain energetics and normative changes in body weight gain are closely inversely 
related. This finding suggests a trade-off in early childhood between energy 
used to support brain development versus energy used to support physical growth 
and fat deposition. To test this theorized energetic trade-off, we analyzed data 
from a large longitudinal sample (N = 1,292) and found that change in EF from 
age 3 to 5 years, as a proxy for brain development in energetically costly 
prefrontal cortex, is inversely related to change in BMI from age 2 to 5 years. 
Greater linear decline in BMI predicted greater linear increase in EF. We 
interpret this finding as tentative support for a brain-body energetic trade-off 
in early childhood with implications for lifetime obesity risk.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12860
PMCID: PMC6859186
PMID: 31102547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to report.


289. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov;23(6):e12966. doi: 10.1111/desc.12966. Epub 2020 Apr 7.

Development of rapid word-object associations in relation to expressive 
vocabulary: Shared commonalities in infants and toddlers with and without 
Williams syndrome.

Ha OR(1), Cashon CH(2), Holt NA(2), Mervis CB(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, 
MO, USA.
(2)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Louisville, 
Louisville, KY, USA.

Associative word learning, i.e., associating a word with an object, is an 
important building block of early word learning for TD infants. This study 
investigated the development of word-object associations by TD infants and 
infants and toddlers with Williams syndrome (WS), a rare genetic disorder 
associated with delayed language and cognitive development. The specific reasons 
for the language delays remain unknown. We investigated whether their early 
language delay could be related to differences in how word-object associations 
are formed. Fifty-nine 11- to 14-month-old TD infants and thirty-one 12- to 
35-month-olds with WS were tested on a modified version of the "switch" task 
(Werker, Cohen, Lloyd, Casasola, & Stager, 1998) using phonetically dissimilar 
words and novel objects. Infants were classified as word learners or novice word 
learners based on their expressive vocabularies (greater than 10 words vs. 10 
words or fewer). We found similar developmental patterns across both 
populations: Expressive vocabulary size classification was an important index of 
the development of word-object associations. Moreover, the development of 
word-object associations evidenced a domain-general progression from independent 
(processing objects separately from words) to integrated (processing 
associations between words and objects). As a group, word learners formed 
word-object associations, but novice word learners did not; instead, they 
focused primarily on the objects. Findings build on previous research suggesting 
that although early language acquisition is delayed in infants with WS, infants 
and toddlers with and without WS share a common developmental pattern and set of 
mechanisms in early word learning.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12966
PMCID: PMC7502509
PMID: 32196857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement The authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.


290. Dev Sci. 2020 Sep;23(5):e12971. doi: 10.1111/desc.12971. Epub 2020 May 21.

An embodied account of teleological processes.

Juvrud J(1), Gredebäck G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Child and Babylab, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.

We emphasize a need for more research and propose our own theoretical framework, 
the embodied account of teleological processes, to try to explain the 
inconsistencies in the teleological stance literature and fill the gap in the 
teleological framework.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12971
PMID: 32304134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Dev Sci. 2020 Jan;23(1):e12867. doi: 10.1111/desc.12867. Epub 2019 Jun 17.

Using hippocampal-dependent eyeblink conditioning to predict individual 
differences in spatial reorientation strategies in 3- to 6-year-olds.

Vieites V(1), Pruden SM(1), Shusterman A(2), Reeb-Sutherland BC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Florida International University, Miami, Florida.
(2)Department of Psychology, Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut.

The hippocampus is a subcortical structure in the medial temporal lobe involved 
in cognitive functions such as spatial navigation and reorientation, episodic 
memory, and associative learning. While much is understood about the role of 
hippocampal function in learning and memory in adults, less is known about the 
relations between the hippocampus and the development of these cognitive skills 
in young children due to the limitations of using standard methods (e.g., MRI) 
to examine brain structure and function in developing populations. This study 
used hippocampal-dependent trace eyeblink conditioning (EBC) as a feasible 
approach to examine individual differences in hippocampal functioning as they 
relate to spatial reorientation and episodic memory performance in young 
children. Three- to six-year-old children (N = 50) completed tasks that measured 
EBC, spatial reorientation, and episodic memory, as well as 
non-hippocampal-dependent processing speed abilities. Results revealed that when 
age was held constant, individual differences in EBC performance were 
significantly related to individual differences in performance on the spatial 
reorientation test, but not on the episodic memory or processing speed tests. 
When the relations between hippocampal-dependent EBC and different reorientation 
strategies were explored, it was found that individual differences in 
hippocampal function predicted the use of geometric information for reorienting 
in space as opposed to a combined strategy that uses both geometric information 
and salient visual cues. The utilization of eyeblink conditioning to examine 
hippocampal function in young populations and its implications for understanding 
the dissociation between spatial reorientation and episodic memory development 
are discussed.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12867
PMID: 31125469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12845. doi: 10.1111/desc.12845. Epub 2019 Jun 14.

Risk or resource: Does school climate moderate the influence of community 
violence on children's social-emotional development in the Democratic Republic 
of Congo?

Starkey L(1)(2), Aber JL(2), Crossman A(3).

Author information:
(1)The Graduate Center, City University of New York, New York, New York.
(2)New York University, New York, New York.
(3)John Jay College, City University of New York, New York, New York.

Exposure to community violence is thought to create risk for the social and 
emotional development of children, including those children living in 
low-income, conflict-affected countries. In the absence of other types of 
community resources, schools may be one of the few community resources that can 
help buffer children from the negative effects of community violence exposure. 
We sampled 8,300 students ranging in age from 6-18 years in 123 schools from the 
eastern Democratic Republic of Congo to examine whether and how two distinct 
dimensions of positive school climate can protect two key features of children's 
social-emotional development in the presence of community violence. Multi-level 
models tested the hypothesis that students' perceptions of a positive school 
climate moderated the relation between community violence and self-reported 
mental health problems and peer victimization. Findings support the hypothesis. 
Specifically, a positive school climate protected against mental health problems 
and peer victimization in the presence of high community violence. Students who 
experienced high community violence and a negative school climate generally 
demonstrated the worst development. We find complex interactions between the 
dimensions of school climate and exposure to violence on student 
social-emotional development that highlight the salience of children's contexts 
for developmental studies in low-income countries. We use dynamic developmental 
systems theory and differential impact to discuss the dual potential of schools 
as a buffer against the effects of violence or as a source of compounded risk.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12845
PMID: 31056828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12690. doi: 10.1111/desc.12690. Epub 2018 Jun 17.

Longitudinal development of attention and inhibitory control during the first 
year of life.

Holmboe K(1), Bonneville-Roussy A(2), Csibra G(3)(4), Johnson MH(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)School of Education, Froebel College, University of Roehampton, London, UK.
(3)Cognitive Development Centre, Department of Cognitive Science, Central 
European University, Budapest, Hungary.
(4)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Department of Psychological 
Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London, London , UK.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Executive functions (EFs) are key abilities that allow us to control our 
thoughts and actions. Research suggests that two EFs, inhibitory control (IC) 
and working memory (WM), emerge around 9 months. Little is known about IC 
earlier in infancy and whether basic attentional processes form the "building 
blocks" of emerging IC. These questions were investigated longitudinally in 104 
infants tested behaviorally on two screen-based attention tasks at 4 months, and 
on IC tasks at 6 and 9 months. Results provided no evidence that basic attention 
formed precursors for IC. However, there was full support for coherence in IC at 
9 months and partial support for stability in IC from 6 months. This suggests 
that IC emerges earlier than previously assumed. A video abstract of this 
article can be viewed at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rVE17hooANY.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12690
PMID: 29911347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12656. doi: 10.1111/desc.12656. Epub 2018 Mar 15.

Gesture for generalization: gesture facilitates flexible learning of words for 
actions on objects.

Wakefield EM(1)(2), Hall C(2), James KH(3), Goldin-Meadow S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(3)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 
Bloomington, Indiana, USA.

Verb learning is difficult for children (Gentner, ), partially because children 
have a bias to associate a novel verb not only with the action it represents, 
but also with the object on which it is learned (Kersten & Smith, ). Here we 
investigate how well 4- and 5-year-old children (N = 48) generalize novel verbs 
for actions on objects after doing or seeing the action (e.g., twisting a knob 
on an object) or after doing or seeing a gesture for the action (e.g., twisting 
in the air near an object). We find not only that children generalize more 
effectively through gesture experience, but also that this ability to generalize 
persists after a 24-hour delay.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12656
PMID: 29542238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12609. doi: 10.1111/desc.12609. Epub 2017 Sep 27.

Re-examination of Oostenbroek et al. (2016): evidence for neonatal imitation of 
tongue protrusion.

Meltzoff AN(1), Murray L(2), Simpson E(3), Heimann M(4), Nagy E(5), Nadel J(6), 
Pedersen EJ(7), Brooks R(1), Messinger DS(3), Pascalis L(8), Subiaul F(9), 
Paukner A(10), Ferrari PF(11).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Learning & Brain Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Reading, Reading, UK & Department of 
Psychology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida, USA.
(4)Department of Behavioral Sciences and Learning, Linköping University, 
Linköping, Sweden.
(5)School of Psychology, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK.
(6)Centre Emotion, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(7)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of Colorado, Boulder, 
CO, USA.
(8)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(9)Department of Speech, Language & Hearing Sciences, George Washington 
University, Washington, DC, USA.
(10)Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, Rockville, MD, USA.
(11)Institut des Sciences, Cognitives-Marc Jeannerod, Université Claude Bernard, 
Lyon 1, Lyon, France.

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2019 Mar;22(2):e12720.
    Dev Sci. 2019 Mar;22(2):e12738.

The meaning, mechanism, and function of imitation in early infancy have been 
actively discussed since Meltzoff and Moore's (1977) report of facial and manual 
imitation by human neonates. Oostenbroek et al. (2016) claim to challenge the 
existence of early imitation and to counter all interpretations so far offered. 
Such claims, if true, would have implications for theories of social-cognitive 
development. Here we identify 11 flaws in Oostenbroek et al.'s experimental 
design that biased the results toward null effects. We requested and obtained 
the authors' raw data. Contrary to the authors' conclusions, new analyses reveal 
significant tongue-protrusion imitation at all four ages tested (1, 3, 6, and 9 
weeks old). We explain how the authors missed this pattern and offer five 
recommendations for designing future experiments. Infant imitation raises 
fundamental issues about action representation, social learning, and 
brain-behavior relations. The debate about the origins and development of 
imitation reflects its importance to theories of developmental science.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12609
PMCID: PMC6710010
PMID: 28952202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Dev Sci. 2019 Mar;22(2):e12742. doi: 10.1111/desc.12742. Epub 2018 Sep 19.

Behaviors speak louder than explicit reports: Implicit metacognition in 
2.5-year-old children.

Geurten M(1)(2), Bastin C(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Cyclotron Research Center, University of Liège, Liege, Belgium.
(2)Psychology and Neuroscience of Cognition Unit, University of Liège, Liege, 
Belgium.
(3)National Fund for Scientific Research, University of Liège, Liege, Belgium.

Recent research has shown that children as young as age 3.5 show behavioral 
responses to uncertainty although they are not able to report it explicitly. In 
this study, we tested the hypothesis that some form of metacognition is already 
available to guide children's decisions before the age of 3. Two groups of 2.5- 
and 3.5-year-old children were asked to complete a forced-choice perceptual 
identification test and to explicitly rate their confidence in each decision. 
Moreover, participants had the opportunity to ask for a cue to help them decide 
if their response was correct. Our results revealed that all children asked for 
a cue more often after an incorrect response than after a correct response in 
the forced-choice identification test, indicating a good ability to implicitly 
introspect on the results of their cognitive operations. On the contrary, none 
of these children displayed metacognitive sensitivity when making explicit 
confidence judgments, consistent with previous evidence of later development of 
explicit metacognition. Critically, our findings suggest that implicit 
metacognition exists much earlier than typically assumed, as early as 2.5 years 
of age.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12742
PMID: 30159971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12578. doi: 10.1111/desc.12578. Epub 2017 Jul 5.

Developmental trajectory of neural specialization for letter and number visual 
processing.

Park J(1)(2), van den Berg B(3), Chiang C(4), Woldorff MG(4)(5)(6), Brannon 
EM(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Massachusetts, 
USA.
(2)Commonwealth Honors College, University of Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, University Medical Center Groningen, University 
of Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Duke University, USA.
(6)Department of Psychology & Neuroscience, Duke University, USA.
(7)Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, USA.

Adult neuroimaging studies have demonstrated dissociable neural activation 
patterns in the visual cortex in response to letters (Latin alphabet) and 
numbers (Arabic numerals), which suggest a strong experiential influence of 
reading and mathematics on the human visual system. Here, developmental 
trajectories in the event-related potential (ERP) patterns evoked by visual 
processing of letters, numbers, and false fonts were examined in four different 
age groups (7-, 10-, 15-year-olds, and young adults). The 15-year-olds and 
adults showed greater neural sensitivity to letters over numbers in the left 
visual cortex and the reverse pattern in the right visual cortex, extending 
previous findings in adults to teenagers. In marked contrast, 7- and 
10-year-olds did not show this dissociable neural pattern. Furthermore, the 
contrast of familiar stimuli (letters or numbers) versus unfamiliar ones (false 
fonts) showed stark ERP differences between the younger (7- and 10-year-olds) 
and the older (15-year-olds and adults) participants. These results suggest that 
both coarse (familiar versus unfamiliar) and fine (letters versus numbers) 
tuning for letters and numbers continue throughout childhood and early 
adolescence, demonstrating a profound impact of uniquely human cultural 
inventions on visual cognition and its development.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12578
PMID: 28681391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12569. doi: 10.1111/desc.12569. Epub 2017 Jun 9.

Lexical-processing efficiency leverages novel word learning in infants and 
toddlers.

Lany J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame, Indiana, USA.

Children who rapidly recognize and interpret familiar words typically have 
accelerated lexical growth, providing indirect evidence that lexical processing 
efficiency (LPE) is related to word-learning ability. Here we directly tested 
whether children with better LPE are better able to learn novel words. In 
Experiment 1, 17- and 30-month-olds were tested on an LPE task and on a simple 
word-learning task. The 17-month-olds' LPE scores predicted word learning in a 
regression model, and only those with relatively good LPE showed evidence of 
learning. The 30-month-olds learned novel words quite well regardless of LPE, 
but in a more difficult word-learning task (Experiment 2), their LPE predicted 
word-learning ability. These findings suggest that LPE supports word-learning 
processes, especially when learning is difficult.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12569
PMID: 28597549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12582. doi: 10.1111/desc.12582. Epub 2017 Jun 20.

The real thing: preschoolers prefer actual activities to pretend ones.

Taggart J(1), Heise MJ(1), Lillard AS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA.

Pretend play is a quintessential activity of early childhood, and adults supply 
children with many toys to encourage it. Do young children actually prefer to 
pretend, or do they do it because they are unable to engage in some activities 
for real? Here we examined, for nine different activities, American middle-class 
preschoolers' preferences for pretend and real activities. The 100 children we 
tested (M = 58.5 months, range 36 to 82 months) overwhelmingly preferred real 
activities to pretend ones, and this preference increased from age 3 to age 4, 
then remained steady through age 6. Children provided cogent justifications for 
their preferences. The results are discussed with reference to other domains in 
which children show reality preferences and with respect to the content of 
preschool curricula.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12582
PMID: 28634992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12736. doi: 10.1111/desc.12736. Epub 2018 Sep 18.

A little labeling goes a long way: Semi-supervised learning in infancy.

LaTourrette A(1), Waxman SR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois.
(2)Institute for Policy Research, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois.

There is considerable evidence that labeling supports infants' object 
categorization. Yet in daily life, most of the category exemplars that infants 
encounter will remain unlabeled. Inspired by recent evidence from machine 
learning, we propose that infants successfully exploit this sparsely labeled 
input through "semi-supervised learning." Providing only a few labeled exemplars 
leads infants to initiate the process of categorization, after which they can 
integrate all subsequent exemplars, labeled or unlabeled, into their evolving 
category representations. Using a classic novelty preference task, we introduced 
2-year-old infants (n = 96) to a novel object category, varying whether and when 
its exemplars were labeled. Infants were equally successful whether all 
exemplars were labeled (fully supervised condition) or only the first two 
exemplars were labeled (semi-supervised condition), but they failed when no 
exemplars were labeled (unsupervised condition). Furthermore, the timing of the 
labeling mattered: when the labeled exemplars were provided at the end, rather 
than the beginning, of familiarization (reversed semi-supervised condition), 
infants failed to learn the category. This provides the first evidence of 
semi-supervised learning in infancy, revealing that infants excel at learning 
from exactly the kind of input that they typically receive in acquiring 
real-world categories and their names.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12736
PMCID: PMC6294654
PMID: 30157311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Dev Sci. 2019 May;22(3):e12769. doi: 10.1111/desc.12769. Epub 2018 Dec 19.

When causality shapes the experience of time: Evidence for temporal binding in 
young children.

Blakey E(1), Tecwyn EC(2), McCormack T(3), Lagnado DA(4), Hoerl C(5), Lorimer 
S(3), Buehner MJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
(2)School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.
(3)School of Psychology, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, UK.
(4)Department of Psychology, University College London, London, UK.
(5)Department of Philosophy, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK.

It is well established that the temporal proximity of two events is a 
fundamental cue to causality. Recent research with adults has shown that this 
relation is bidirectional: events that are believed to be causally related are 
perceived as occurring closer together in time-the so-called temporal binding 
effect. Here, we examined the developmental origins of temporal binding. 
Participants predicted when an event that was either caused by a button press, 
or preceded by a non-causal signal, would occur. We demonstrate for the first 
time that children as young as 4 years are susceptible to temporal binding. 
Binding occurred both when the button press was executed via intentional action, 
and when a machine caused it. These results suggest binding is a fundamental, 
early developing property of perception and grounded in causal knowledge. A 
video abstract of this article can be viewed at 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EQC_MqjxZQQ.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12769
PMID: 30414236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Dev Sci. 2017 Nov;20(6):10.1111/desc.12480. doi: 10.1111/desc.12480. Epub 2016 
Oct 26.

Tracing trajectories of audio-visual learning in the infant brain.

Kersey AJ(1), Emberson LL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Princeton University, USA.

Although infants begin learning about their environment before they are born, 
little is known about how the infant brain changes during learning. Here, we 
take the initial steps in documenting how the neural responses in the brain 
change as infants learn to associate audio and visual stimuli. Using functional 
near-infrared spectroscopy (fNRIS) to record hemodynamic responses in the infant 
cortex (temporal, occipital, and frontal cortex), we find that across the infant 
brain, learning is characterized by an increase in activation followed by a 
decrease. We take this U-shaped response as evidence of repetition enhancement 
during early stages of learning and repetition suppression during later stages, 
a result that mirrors the Hunter and Ames model of infant visual preference. 
Furthermore, we find that the neural response to violations of the learned 
associations can be predicted by the shape of the learning curve in temporal and 
occipital cortex. These data provide the first look at the shape of the neural 
response during audio-visual associative learning in infancy establishing that 
diverse regions of the infant brain exhibit systematic changes across the 
time-course of learning.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12480
PMCID: PMC7294584
PMID: 27781324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Dev Sci. 2019 May;22(3):e12774. doi: 10.1111/desc.12774. Epub 2018 Dec 17.

Encouraging children to mentalise about a perceived outgroup increases prosocial 
behaviour towards outgroup members.

McLoughlin N(1), Over H(2).

Author information:
(1)Wheelock College of Education and Human Development, Boston University, 
Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of York, York, UK.

We investigated whether encouraging young children to discuss the mental states 
of an immigrant group would elicit more prosocial behaviour towards them and 
impact on their perception of a group member's emotional experience. Five- and 
6-year-old children were either prompted to talk about the thoughts and feelings 
of this social group or to talk about their actions. Across two studies, we 
found that this manipulation increased the extent to which children shared with 
a novel member of the immigrant group who was the victim of a minor 
transgression. The manipulation did not lead to greater sharing towards a victim 
from the children's own culture and did not influence their perception of a 
victim's negative emotions. These results may ultimately have implications for 
interventions aimed at fostering positive intergroup relations within the 
context of immigration.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12774
PMID: 30451337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12704. doi: 10.1111/desc.12704. Epub 2018 Jul 16.

The profile of abstract rule learning in infancy: Meta-analytic and experimental 
evidence.

Rabagliati H(1), Ferguson B(2), Lew-Williams C(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Philosophy, Psychology and Language Sciences, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(2)Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois.
(3)Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey.

Everyone agrees that infants possess general mechanisms for learning about the 
world, but the existence and operation of more specialized mechanisms is 
controversial. One mechanism-rule learning-has been proposed as potentially 
specific to speech, based on findings that 7-month-olds can learn abstract 
repetition rules from spoken syllables (e.g. ABB patterns: wo-fe-fe, ga-tu-tu…) 
but not from closely matched stimuli, such as tones. Subsequent work has shown 
that learning of abstract patterns is not simply specific to speech. However, we 
still lack a parsimonious explanation to tie together the diverse, messy, and 
occasionally contradictory findings in that literature. We took two routes to 
creating a new profile of rule learning: meta-analysis of 20 prior reports on 
infants' learning of abstract repetition rules (including 1,318 infants in 63 
experiments total), and an experiment on learning of such rules from a natural, 
non-speech communicative signal. These complementary approaches revealed that 
infants were most likely to learn abstract patterns from meaningful stimuli. We 
argue that the ability to detect and generalize simple patterns supports 
learning across domains in infancy but chiefly when the signal is meaningfully 
relevant to infants' experience with sounds, objects, language, and people.

© 2018 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12704
PMCID: PMC6294696
PMID: 30014590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12664. doi: 10.1111/desc.12664. Epub 2018 Apr 16.

Gesture helps learners learn, but not merely by guiding their visual attention.

Wakefield E(1)(2), Novack MA(1)(3), Congdon EL(1)(4), Franconeri S(3), 
Goldin-Meadow S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Loyola University, Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, Bucknell University, Lewisburg, PA, USA.

Teaching a new concept through gestures-hand movements that accompany 
speech-facilitates learning above-and-beyond instruction through speech alone 
(e.g., Singer & Goldin-Meadow, ). However, the mechanisms underlying this 
phenomenon are still under investigation. Here, we use eye tracking to explore 
one often proposed mechanism-gesture's ability to direct visual attention. 
Behaviorally, we replicate previous findings: Children perform significantly 
better on a posttest after learning through Speech+Gesture instruction than 
through Speech Alone instruction. Using eye tracking measures, we show that 
children who watch a math lesson with gesture do allocate their visual attention 
differently from children who watch a math lesson without gesture-they look more 
to the problem being explained, less to the instructor, and are more likely to 
synchronize their visual attention with information presented in the 
instructor's speech (i.e., follow along with speech) than children who watch the 
no-gesture lesson. The striking finding is that, even though these looking 
patterns positively predict learning outcomes, the patterns do not mediate the 
effects of training condition (Speech Alone vs. Speech+Gesture) on posttest 
success. We find instead a complex relation between gesture and visual attention 
in which gesture moderates the impact of visual looking patterns on 
learning-following along with speech predicts learning for children in the 
Speech+Gesture condition, but not for children in the Speech Alone condition. 
Gesture's beneficial effects on learning thus come not merely from its ability 
to guide visual attention, but also from its ability to synchronize with speech 
and affect what learners glean from that speech.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12664
PMCID: PMC6191377
PMID: 29663574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Dev Sci. 2019 Mar;22(2):e12737. doi: 10.1111/desc.12737. Epub 2018 Sep 18.

Dissociable spatial memory systems revealed by typical and atypical human 
development.

Julian JB(1)(2), Kamps FS(3), Epstein RA(1), Dilks DD(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania.
(2)Kavli Institute for Systems Neuroscience, Centre for Neural Computation, The 
Egil and Pauline Braathen and Fred Kavli Centre for Cortical Microcircuits, 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
(3)Department of Psychology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia.

Rodent lesion studies have revealed the existence of two causally dissociable 
spatial memory systems, localized to the hippocampus and striatum that are 
preferentially sensitive to environmental boundaries and landmark objects, 
respectively. Here we test whether these two memory systems are causally 
dissociable in humans by examining boundary- and landmark-based memory in 
typical and atypical development. Adults with Williams syndrome (WS)-a 
developmental disorder with known hippocampal abnormalities-and typical children 
and adults, performed a navigation task that involved learning locations 
relative to a boundary or a landmark object. We found that boundary-based memory 
was severely impaired in WS compared to typically-developing mental-age matched 
(MA) children and chronological-age matched (CA) adults, whereas landmark-based 
memory was similar in all groups. Furthermore, landmark-based memory matured 
earlier in typical development than boundary-based memory, consistent with the 
idea that the WS cognitive phenotype arises from developmental arrest of late 
maturing cognitive systems. Together, these findings provide causal and 
developmental evidence for dissociable spatial memory systems in humans.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12737
PMCID: PMC6391167
PMID: 30176106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Dev Sci. 2019 Mar;22(2):e12756. doi: 10.1111/desc.12756. Epub 2018 Oct 25.

Metacognitive scaffolding boosts cognitive and neural benefits following 
executive attention training in children.

Pozuelos JP(1), Combita LM(1), Abundis A(1), Paz-Alonso PM(2), Conejero Á(1), 
Guerra S(1), Rueda MR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology and Center for Research on Mind, Brain 
and Behavior (CIMCYC), Universidad de Granada, Granada, Spain.
(2)Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language, BCBL, San Sebastian, Spain.

Interventions including social scaffolding and metacognitive strategies have 
been used in educational settings to promote cognition. In addition, increasing 
evidence shows that computerized process-based training enhances cognitive 
skills. However, no prior studies have examined the effect of combining these 
two training strategies. The goal of this study was to test the combined effect 
of metacognitive scaffolding and computer-based training of executive attention 
in a sample of typically developing preschoolers at the cognitive and brain 
levels. Compared to children in the regular training protocol and an untrained 
active control group, children in the metacognitive group showed larger gains on 
intelligence and significant increases on an electrophysiological index 
associated with conflict processing. Moreover, changes in the conflict-related 
brain activity predicted gains in intelligence in the metacognitive scaffolding 
group. These results suggest that metacognitive scaffolding boosts the influence 
of process-based training on cognitive efficiency and brain plasticity related 
to executive attention.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12756
PMID: 30257077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Dev Sci. 2019 May;22(3):e12755. doi: 10.1111/desc.12755. Epub 2018 Oct 10.

Inside bilingualism: Language background modulates selective attention to a 
talker's mouth.

Birulés J(1), Bosch L(1), Brieke R(1), Pons F(1), Lewkowicz DJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognition, Development and Educational Psychology, Universitat 
de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northeastern University, 
Boston, Massachusetts.

Previous findings indicate that bilingual Catalan/Spanish-learning infants 
attend more to the highly salient audiovisual redundancy cues normally available 
in a talker's mouth than do monolingual infants. Presumably, greater attention 
to such cues renders the challenge of learning two languages easier. Spanish and 
Catalan are, however, rhythmically and phonologically close languages. This 
raises the possibility that bilinguals only rely on redundant audiovisual cues 
when their languages are close. To test this possibility, we exposed 
15-month-old and 4- to 6-year-old close-language bilinguals (Spanish/Catalan) 
and distant-language bilinguals (Spanish/"other") to videos of a talker uttering 
Spanish or Catalan (native) and English (non-native) monologues and recorded 
eye-gaze to the talker's eyes and mouth. At both ages, the close-language 
bilinguals attended more to the talker's mouth than the distant-language 
bilinguals. This indicates that language proximity modulates selective attention 
to a talker's mouth during early childhood and suggests that reliance on the 
greater salience of audiovisual speech cues depends on the difficulty of the 
speech-processing task.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12755
PMID: 30251757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12696. doi: 10.1111/desc.12696. Epub 2018 Jun 19.

Questioning supports effective transmission of knowledge and increased 
exploratory learning in pre-kindergarten children.

Yu Y(1)(2), Landrum AR(3), Bonawitz E(2), Shafto P(2).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Education, Singapore.
(2)Department of Psychology, Rutgers University-Newark, New Jersey.
(3)College of Media & Communication, Texas Tech University, Texas.

How can education optimize transmission of knowledge while also fostering 
further learning? Focusing on children at the cusp of formal schooling (N = 180, 
age = 4.0-6.0 y), we investigate learning after direct instruction by a 
knowledgeable teacher, after questioning by a knowledgeable teacher, and after 
questioning by a naïve informant. Consistent with previous findings, instruction 
by a knowledgeable teacher allows effective information transmission but at the 
cost of exploration and further learning. Critically, we find a dual benefit for 
questioning by a knowledgeable teacher: Such pedagogical questioning both 
effectively transmits knowledge and fosters exploration and further learning, 
regardless of whether the question was directed to the child or directed to a 
third party and overheard by the child. These effects are not observed when the 
same question is asked by a naïve informant. We conclude that a teacher's choice 
of pedagogical method may differentially influence learning through their 
choices of how, and how not, to present evidence, with implications for 
transmission of knowledge and self-directed discovery. A video abstract of this 
article can be viewed at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FJXH2b65wL8.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12696
PMID: 29920864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12659. doi: 10.1111/desc.12659. Epub 2018 Mar 15.

Symbouki: a meta-analysis on the emergence of sound symbolism in early language 
acquisition.

Fort M(1)(2), Lammertink I(3), Peperkamp S(4)(5), Guevara-Rukoz A(4), Fikkert 
P(6), Tsuji S(4)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Speech and Cognition, GIPSA- Lab, CNRS UMR 5216, Inria, 
Grenoble Institute of Engineering, University of Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, 
France.
(2)CNRS UMR 5105, LPNC, University of Grenoble Alpes, University Savoie Mont 
Blanc, Grenoble, France.
(3)Amsterdam Center for Language and Communication, University of Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(4)LSCP, Département d'Etudes Cognitives, ENS, EHESS, CNRS, PSL University, 
Paris, France.
(5)Faculté de Médecine Paris Descartes, Maternité Port-Royal, AP-HP, France.
(6)Center for Language Studies, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

Adults and toddlers systematically associate pseudowords such as "bouba" and 
"kiki" with round and spiky shapes, respectively, a sound symbolic phenomenon 
known as the "bouba-kiki effect". To date, whether this sound symbolic effect is 
a property of the infant brain present at birth or is a learned aspect of 
language perception remains unknown. Yet, solving this question is fundamental 
for our understanding of early language acquisition. Indeed, an early 
sensitivity to such sound symbolic associations could provide a powerful 
mechanism for language learning, playing a bootstrapping role in the 
establishment of novel sound-meaning associations. The aim of the present 
meta-analysis (SymBouKi) is to provide a quantitative overview of the emergence 
of the bouba-kiki effect in infancy and early childhood. It allows a 
high-powered assessment of the true sound symbolic effect size by pooling over 
the entire set of 11 extant studies (six published, five unpublished), entailing 
data from 425 participants between 4 and 38 months of age. The quantitative data 
provide statistical support for a moderate, but significant, sound symbolic 
effect. Further analysis found a greater sensitivity to sound symbolism for 
bouba-type pseudowords (i.e., round sound-shape correspondences) than for 
kiki-type pseudowords (i.e., spiky sound-shape correspondences). For the 
kiki-type pseudowords, the effect emerged with age. Such discrepancy challenges 
the view that sensitivity to sound symbolism is an innate language mechanism 
rooted in an exuberant interconnected brain. We propose alternative hypotheses 
where both innate and learned mechanisms are at play in the emergence of 
sensitivity to sound symbolic relationships.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12659
PMID: 29542266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Dev Sci. 2019 Mar;22(2):e12757. doi: 10.1111/desc.12757. Epub 2018 Oct 18.

Natural reference: A phylo- and ontogenetic perspective on the comprehension of 
iconic gestures and vocalizations.

Bohn M(1)(2), Call J(3)(4), Tomasello M(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, California.
(2)Leipzig Research Center, for Early Child Development, Leipzig University, 
Leipzig, Germany.
(3)School of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of St. Andrews, St. 
Andrews, UK.
(4)Department of Developmental and Comparative Psychology, Max Planck Institute 
for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(5)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina.

The recognition of iconic correspondence between signal and referent has been 
argued to bootstrap the acquisition and emergence of language. Here, we study 
the ontogeny, and to some extent the phylogeny, of the ability to spontaneously 
relate iconic signals, gestures, and/or vocalizations, to previous experience. 
Children at 18, 24, and 36 months of age (N = 216) and great apes (N = 13) 
interacted with two apparatuses, each comprising a distinct action and sound. 
Subsequently, an experimenter mimicked either the action, the sound, or both in 
combination to refer to one of the apparatuses. Experiments 1 and 2 found no 
spontaneous comprehension in great apes and in 18-month-old children. At 
24 months of age, children were successful with a composite vocalization-gesture 
signal but not with either vocalization or gesture alone. At 36 months, children 
succeeded both with a composite vocalization-gesture signal and with gesture 
alone, but not with vocalization alone. In general, gestures were understood 
better compared to vocalizations. Experiment 4 showed that gestures were 
understood irrespective of how children learned about the corresponding action 
(through observation or self-experience). This pattern of results demonstrates 
that iconic signals can be a powerful way to establish reference in the absence 
of language, but they are not trivial for children to comprehend and not all 
iconic signals are created equal.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12757
PMID: 30267557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12715. doi: 10.1111/desc.12715. Epub 2018 Aug 10.

Day by day, hour by hour: Naturalistic language input to infants.

Bergelson E(1)(2), Amatuni A(1)(2), Dailey S(1)(2), Koorathota S(2)(3), Tor 
S(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Psychology & Neuroscience, Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke 
University, Durham, North Carolina.
(2)Brain and Cognitive Science Department, University of Rochester, Rochester, 
New York.
(3)Division of Behavioral Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New 
York.
(4)Falk College, Department of Marriage and Family Therapy, Syracuse University, 
Syracuse, New York.

Measurements of infants' quotidian experiences provide critical information 
about early development. However, the role of sampling methods in providing 
these measurements is rarely examined. Here we directly compare language input 
from hour-long video-recordings and daylong audio-recordings within the same 
group of 44 infants at 6 and 7 months. We compared 12 measures of language 
quantity and lexical diversity, talker variability, utterance-type, and object 
presence, finding moderate correlations across recording-types. However, 
video-recordings generally featured far denser noun input across these measures 
compared to the daylong audio-recordings, more akin to 'peak' audio hours 
(though not as high in talkers and word-types). Although audio-recordings 
captured ~10 times more awake-time than videos, the noun input in them was only 
2-4 times greater. Notably, whether we compared videos to daylong 
audio-recordings or peak audio times, videos featured relatively fewer 
declaratives and more questions; furthermore, the most common video-recorded 
nouns were less consistent across families than the top audio-recording nouns 
were. Thus, hour-long videos and daylong audio-recordings revealed fairly 
divergent pictures of the language infants hear and learn from in their daily 
lives. We suggest that short video-recordings provide a dense and somewhat 
different sample of infants' language experiences, rather than a typical one, 
and should be used cautiously for extrapolation about common words, talkers, 
utterance-types, and contexts at larger timescales. If theories of language 
development are to be held accountable to 'facts on the ground' from 
observational data, greater care is needed to unpack the ramifications of 
sampling methods of early language input.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12715
PMCID: PMC6294661
PMID: 30094888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: N.B.: All authors were in Brain & Cognitive 
Sciences at U. Rochester during data collection and have no COI to declare.


313. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12746. doi: 10.1111/desc.12746. Epub 2018 Oct 8.

The organization of words and environmental sounds in the second year: 
Behavioral and electrophysiological evidence.

Hendrickson K(1), Love T(2)(3), Walenski M(4), Friend M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Communication Sciences & Disorders, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, Iowa.
(2)Center for Research in Language, University of California, San Diego, 
California.
(3)School of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, San Diego State University, 
San Diego, California.
(4)School of Communication, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois.
(5)Department of Psychology, San Diego State University, San Diego, California.

The majority of research examining early auditory-semantic processing and 
organization is based on studies of meaningful relations between words and 
referents. However, a thorough investigation into the fundamental relation 
between acoustic signals and meaning requires an understanding of how meaning is 
associated with both lexical and non-lexical sounds. Indeed, it is unknown how 
meaningful auditory information that is not lexical (e.g., environmental sounds) 
is processed and organized in the young brain. To capture the structure of 
semantic organization for words and environmental sounds, we record 
event-related potentials as 20-month-olds view images of common nouns (e.g., 
dog) while hearing words or environmental sounds that match the picture (e.g., 
"dog" or barking), that are within-category violations (e.g., "cat" or meowing), 
or that are between-category violations (e.g., "pen" or scribbling). Results 
show both words and environmental sounds exhibit larger negative amplitudes to 
between-category violations relative to matches. Unlike words, which show a 
greater negative response early and consistently to within-category violations, 
such an effect for environmental sounds occurs late in semantic processing. 
Thus, as in adults, the young brain represents semantic relations between words 
and between environmental sounds, though it more readily differentiates 
semantically similar words compared to environmental sounds.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12746
PMCID: PMC6294716
PMID: 30159958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Dev Sci. 2019 Mar;22(2):e12754. doi: 10.1111/desc.12754. Epub 2018 Oct 8.

The vocabulary spurt predicts the emergence of backward semantic inhibition in 
18-month-old toddlers.

Chow J(1), Aimola Davies AM(2), Fuentes LJ(3)(4), Plunkett K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)Research School of Psychology, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, 
Australia.
(3)Department of Basic Psychology and Methodology, University of Murcia, Murcia, 
Spain.
(4)Regional Campus of International Excellence "Campus Mare Nostrum", Murcia, 
Spain.

The current study examines the relationship between 18-month-old toddlers' 
vocabulary size and their ability to inhibit attention to no-longer relevant 
information using the backward semantic inhibition paradigm. When adults switch 
attention from one semantic category to another, the former and 
no-longer-relevant semantic category becomes inhibited, and subsequent attention 
to an item that belongs to the inhibited semantic category is impaired. Here we 
demonstrate that 18-month-olds can inhibit attention to no-longer relevant 
semantic categories, but only if they have a relatively large vocabulary. These 
findings suggest that an increased number of items (word knowledge) in the 
toddler lexical-semantic system during the "vocabulary spurt" at 18-months may 
be an important driving force behind the emergence of a semantic inhibitory 
mechanism. Possessing more words in the mental lexicon likely results in the 
formation of inhibitory links between words, which allow toddlers to select and 
deselect words and concepts more efficiently. Our findings highlight the role of 
vocabulary growth in the development of inhibitory processes in the emerging 
lexical-semantic system.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12754
PMID: 30248216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12673. doi: 10.1111/desc.12673. Epub 2018 May 14.

A cross-cultural investigation of children's implicit attitudes toward White and 
Black racial outgroups.

Steele JR(1), George M(1), Williams A(2), Tay E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)School of Education, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.

Initial theory and research examining children's implicit racial attitudes 
suggest that an implicit preference favoring socially advantaged groups emerges 
early in childhood and remains stable across development (Dunham, Baron, & 
Banaji, 2008). In two studies, we examined the ubiquity of this theory by 
measuring non-Black minority and non-White majority children's implicit racial 
attitudes toward White and Black racial outgroups in two distinct cultural 
contexts. In Study 1, non-Black minority children in an urban North American 
community with a large Black population showed an implicit pro-White (versus 
Black) bias in early childhood. Contrary to previous findings, the magnitude of 
this bias was lower among older children. In Study 2, Malay (majority) and 
Chinese (minority) children and adults in the Southeast Asian country of Brunei, 
with limited contact with White or Black peers, showed an implicit pro-White 
(versus Black) bias in early childhood. However, the magnitude of bias was 
greater for adults. Together, these findings support initial theorizing about 
the early development of implicit intergroup cognition, but suggest that context 
may affect these biases across development to a greater extent than was 
previously thought. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vgQP8e4MSCk&feature=youtu.be.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12673
PMID: 29756669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Dev Sci. 2019 Mar;22(2):e12741. doi: 10.1111/desc.12741. Epub 2018 Sep 27.

Children's scale errors: A by-product of lexical development?

Grzyb BJ(1), Cangelosi A(1), Cattani A(1), Floccia C(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Plymouth, Plymouth, UK.

Scale errors occur when young children seriously attempt to perform an action on 
an object which is impossible due to its size. Children vary substantially in 
the incidence of scale errors with many factors potentially contributing to 
these differences, such as age and the type of scale errors. In particular, the 
evidence for an inverted U-shaped curve of scale errors involving the child's 
body (i.e., body scale errors), which would point to a developmental stage, is 
mixed. Here we re-examine how body scale errors vary with age and explore the 
possibility that these errors would be related to the size and properties of 
children's lexicon. A large sample of children aged 18-30 months (N = 125) was 
tested in a scale error elicitation situation. Additionally, parental 
questionnaires were collected to assess children's receptive and expressive 
lexicon. Our key findings are that scale errors linearly decrease with age in 
childhood, and are more likely to be found in early talkers rather than in less 
advanced ones. This suggests that scale errors do not correspond to a 
developmental stage, and that one determinant of these errors is the speed of 
development of the linguistic and conceptual system, as a potential explanation 
for the individual variability in prevalence.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12741
PMID: 30160064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12657. doi: 10.1111/desc.12657. Epub 2018 Mar 22.

Digit identity influences numerical estimation in children and adults.

Lai M(1), Zax A(1), Barth H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut, USA.

Learning the meanings of Arabic numerals involves mapping the number symbols to 
mental representations of their corresponding, approximate numerical quantities. 
It is often assumed that performance on numerical tasks, such as number line 
estimation (NLE), is primarily driven by translating from a presented numeral to 
a mental representation of its overall magnitude. Part of this assumption is 
that the overall numerical magnitude of the presented numeral, not the specific 
digits that comprise it, is what matters for task performance. Here we ask 
whether the magnitudes of the presented target numerals drive symbolic number 
line performance, or whether specific digits influence estimates. If the former 
is true, estimates of numerals with very similar magnitudes but different 
hundreds digits (such as 399 and 402) should be placed in similar locations. 
However, if the latter is true, these placements will differ significantly. In 
two studies (N = 262), children aged 7-11 and adults completed 0-1000 NLE tasks 
with target values drawn from a set of paired numerals that fell on either side 
of "Hundreds" boundaries (e.g., 698 and 701) and "Fifties" boundaries (e.g., 749 
and 752). Study 1 used an atypical speeded NLE task, while Study 2 used a 
standard non-speeded NLE task. Under both speeded and non-speeded conditions, 
specific hundreds digits in the target numerals exerted a strong influence on 
estimates, with large effect sizes at all ages, showing that the magnitudes of 
target numerals are not the primary influence shaping children's or adults' 
placements. We discuss patterns of developmental change and individual 
difference revealed by planned and exploratory analyses.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12657
PMID: 29569299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12687. doi: 10.1111/desc.12687. Epub 2018 Jul 3.

Infants' attention bias to faces as an early marker of social development.

Peltola MJ(1), Yrttiaho S(2), Leppänen JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Human Information Processing Laboratory, Faculty of Social Sciences, 
University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland.
(2)Infant Cognition Laboratory, Tampere Center for Child Health Research, 
Faculty of Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland.

Infants have a strong tendency to look at faces. We examined individual 
variations in this attentional bias in 7-month-old infants by using a 
face-distractor competition paradigm and tested in a longitudinal sample whether 
these variations were associated with outcomes reflecting social behavior at 24 
and 48 months of age (i.e., spontaneous helping, emotion understanding, 
mentalizing, and callous-unemotional traits; N = 100-138). The results showed a 
robust and distinct attention bias to faces at 7 months, particularly when faces 
were displaying a fearful expression. This bias declined between 7 and 24 months 
and there were no significant correlations in attention dwell times between 7 
and 24 months of age. Variations in attention to faces at 7 months were not 
associated with emotion understanding or mentalizing abilities at 48 months of 
age, but increased attention to faces at 7 months (regardless of facial 
expression) was related to more frequent helping responses at 24 months and 
reduced callous-unemotional traits at 48 months of age. Thus, while the results 
fail to associate infants' face bias with later-emerging emotion understanding 
and mentalizing capacities, they are consistent with a model whereby increased 
attention to faces in infancy is linked with the development of affective 
empathy and responsivity to others' needs.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12687
PMID: 29971869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12695. doi: 10.1111/desc.12695. Epub 2018 Jul 30.

Explaining early moral hypocrisy: Numerical cognition promotes equal sharing 
behavior in preschool-aged children.

Chernyak N(1), Harris PL(2), Cordes S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Sciences, University of California, Irvine.
(2)Graduate School of Education, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(3)Department of Psychology, Boston College, Massachusetts.

Recent work has documented that despite preschool-aged children's understanding 
of social norms surrounding sharing, they fail to share their resources equally 
in many contexts. Here we explored two hypotheses for this failure: an 
insufficient motivation hypothesis and an insufficient cognitive resources 
hypothesis. With respect to the latter, we specifically explored whether 
children's numerical cognition-their understanding of the cardinal 
principle-might underpin their abilities to share equally. In Experiment 1, 
preschoolers' numerical cognition fully mediated age-related changes in 
children's fair sharing. We found little support for the insufficient motivation 
hypothesis-children stated that they had shared fairly, and failures in sharing 
fairly were a reflection of their number knowledge. Numerical cognition did not 
relate to children's knowledge of the norms of equality (Experiment 2). Results 
suggest that the knowledge-behavior gap in fairness may be partly explained by 
the differences in cognitive skills required for conceptual and behavioral 
equality.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12695
PMID: 30058779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12706. doi: 10.1111/desc.12706. Epub 2018 Sep 5.

Developmental changes of sleep spindles and their impact on sleep-dependent 
memory consolidation and general cognitive abilities: A longitudinal approach.

Hahn M(1), Joechner AK(1), Roell J(1), Schabus M(1), Heib DP(1), Gruber G(2)(3), 
Peigneux P(4), Hoedlmoser K(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Sleep, Cognition and Consciousness Research, Department of 
Psychology, Centre for Cognitive Neuroscience, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, 
Austria.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Medical University of Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria.
(3)The Siesta Group, Vienna, Austria.
(4)UR2NF - Neuropsychology and Functional Neuroimaging Research Unit affiliated 
at CRCN - Centre de Recherches en Cognition et Neurosciences and UNI - ULB 
Neurosciences Institute, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Bruxelles, Belgium.

Sleep spindles are related to sleep-dependent memory consolidation and general 
cognitive abilities. However, they undergo drastic maturational changes during 
adolescence. Here we used a longitudinal approach (across 7 years) to explore 
whether developmental changes in sleep spindle density can explain individual 
differences in sleep-dependent memory consolidation and general cognitive 
abilities. Ambulatory polysomnography was recorded during four nights in 34 
healthy subjects (24 female) with two nights (baseline and experimental) at 
initial recording (age range 8-11 years) and two nights at follow-up recording 
(age range 14-18 years). For declarative learning, participants encoded word 
pairs with a subsequent recall before and after sleep. General cognitive 
abilities were measured by the Wechsler Intelligence Scale. Higher slow (11-13 
Hz) than fast (13-15 Hz) spindle density at frontal, central, and parietal sites 
during initial recordings, followed by a shift to higher fast than slow spindle 
density at central and parietal sites during follow-up recordings, suggest that 
mature spindle topography develops throughout adolescence. Fast spindle density 
increases from baseline to experimental night were positively related to 
sleep-dependent memory consolidation. In addition, we found that the development 
of fast spindles predicted the improvement in memory consolidation across the 
two longitudinal measurements, a finding that underlines a crucial role for 
mature fast spindles for sleep-dependent memory consolidation. Furthermore, slow 
spindle changes across adolescence were related to general cognitive abilities, 
a relationship that could indicate the maturation of frontal networks relevant 
for efficient cognitive processing. A video abstract of this article can be 
viewed at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7NXJzm8HbIw and 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iuMQY1OIJ0s.

© 2018 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12706
PMCID: PMC6492121
PMID: 30252185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12577. doi: 10.1111/desc.12577. Epub 2017 Jul 12.

Children reading spoken words: interactions between vocabulary and orthographic 
expectancy.

Wegener S(1)(2), Wang HC(1)(2), de Lissa P(2)(3), Robidoux S(4), Nation K(2)(5), 
Castles A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Science, Macquarie University, NSW, Australia.
(2)ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders, Macquarie 
University, NSW, Australia.
(3)Department of Psychology, Macquarie University, NSW, Australia.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

There is an established association between children's oral vocabulary and their 
word reading but its basis is not well understood. Here, we present evidence 
from eye movements for a novel mechanism underlying this association. Two groups 
of 18 Grade 4 children received oral vocabulary training on one set of 16 novel 
words (e.g., 'nesh', 'coib'), but no training on another set. The words were 
assigned spellings that were either predictable from phonology (e.g., nesh) or 
unpredictable (e.g., koyb). These were subsequently shown in print, embedded in 
sentences. Reading times were shorter for orally familiar than unfamiliar items, 
and for words with predictable than unpredictable spellings but, importantly, 
there was an interaction between the two: children demonstrated a larger benefit 
of oral familiarity for predictable than for unpredictable items. These findings 
indicate that children form initial orthographic expectations about spoken words 
before first seeing them in print. A video abstract of this article can be 
viewed at: https://youtu.be/jvpJwpKMM3E.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12577
PMID: 28701027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12627. doi: 10.1111/desc.12627. Epub 2017 Nov 29.

Mere social knowledge impacts children's consumption and categorization of 
foods.

DeJesus JM(1), Shutts K(2), Kinzler KD(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
Wisconsin, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA.

How does social information affect the perception of taste early in life? Does 
mere knowledge of other people's food preferences impact children's own 
experience when eating? In Experiment 1, 5- and 6-year-old children consumed 
more of a food described as popular with other children than a food that was 
described as unpopular with other children, even though the two foods were 
identical. In Experiment 2, children ate more of a food described as popular 
with children than a food described as popular with adults. Experiment 3 tested 
whether different perceptual experiences of otherwise identical foods 
contributed to the mechanisms underlying children's consumption. After sampling 
both endpoints of a sweet-to-sour range (applesauce with 0 mL or 5mL of lemon 
juice added), children were asked to taste and categorize applesauce samples 
with varying amounts of lemon juice added. When classifying ambiguous samples 
that were near the midpoint of the range (2 mL and 3 mL), children were more 
likely to categorize popular foods as sweet as compared to unpopular foods. 
Together, these findings provide evidence that social information plays a 
powerful role in guiding children's consumption and perception of foods. Broader 
links to the sociality of food selection are discussed.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12627
PMCID: PMC5975094
PMID: 29193476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Dev Sci. 2018 Jan;21(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12491. Epub 2016 Nov 23.

Adolescents' inhibitory control: keep it cool or lose control.

Aïte A(1), Cassotti M(1)(2), Linzarini A(1), Osmont A(1), Houdé O(1)(2), Borst 
G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for the Psychology of Child Development and Education, CNRS Unit 
8240, Paris Descartes University, Sorbonne Paris Cité and University of Caen 
Basse-Normandie, France.
(2)Institut Universitaire de France (IUF), Paris, France.

Inhibitory control (i.e., the ability to resist automatisms, temptations, 
distractions, or interference and to adapt to conflicting situations) is a 
determinant of cognitive and socio-emotional development. In light of the 
discrepancies of previous findings on the development of inhibitory control in 
affectively charged contexts, two important issues need to be addressed. We need 
to determine (a) whether cool inhibitory control (in affectively neutral 
contexts) and hot inhibitory control (in affectively charged contexts) follow 
the same developmental pattern and (b) the degree of specificity of these two 
types of inhibitory control at different ages. Thus, in the present study, we 
investigated the developmental patterns of cool and hot inhibitory control and 
the degree of specificity of these abilities in children, adolescents and 
adults. Typically developing children, adolescents, and adults performed two 
Stroop-like tasks: an affectively neutral one (Cool Stroop task) and an 
affectively charged one (Hot Stroop task). In the Cool Stroop task, the 
participants were asked to identify the ink color of the words independent of 
color that the words named; in the Hot Stroop task, the participants were asked 
to identify the emotional expression of a face independent of the emotion named 
by a simultaneously displayed written word. We found that cool inhibitory 
control abilities develop linearly with age, whereas hot inhibitory control 
abilities follow a quadratic developmental pattern, with adolescents displaying 
worse hot inhibitory control abilities than children and adults. In addition, 
cool and hot inhibitory control abilities were correlated in children but not in 
adolescents and adults. The present study suggests (a) that cool and hot 
inhibitory control abilities develop differently from childhood to adulthood - 
i.e., that cool inhibition follows a linear developmental pattern and hot 
inhibition follows an adolescent-specific pattern - and (b) that they become 
progressively more domain-specific with age.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12491
PMID: 27882631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Dev Sci. 2019 Mar;22(2):e12729. doi: 10.1111/desc.12729. Epub 2018 Sep 12.

The development of children's preferences for equality and equity across 13 
individualistic and collectivist cultures.

Huppert E(1), Cowell JM(1)(2), Cheng Y(3), Contreras-Ibáñez C(4), Gomez-Sicard 
N(5), Gonzalez-Gadea ML(6)(7), Huepe D(8), Ibanez A(6)(7)(8), Lee K(9), Mahasneh 
R(10), Malcolm-Smith S(11), Salas N(12), Selcuk B(13), Tungodden B(14), Wong 
A(15), Zhou X(15), Decety J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(2)Department of Psychology, The University of Wisconsin Green Bay, Green Bay, 
Wisconsin.
(3)Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Sociology, Universidad Autonoma Metropolitana-Iztapalapa, 
Mexico City, Mexico.
(5)Research Division Neurosketch SAA, Bogota, Colombia.
(6)INECO Foundation, Favaloro University, National Scientific and Technical 
Research Council, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(7)ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders, Canberra, Australia.
(8)Center for Social and Cognitive Neuroscience, School of Psychology, 
Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez, Santiago, Chile.
(9)Erick Jackman Institute of Child Study, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Canada.
(10)College of Education, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar.
(11)Department of Psychology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(12)Faculty of Education at the Universidad Autónoma de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(13)Department of Psychology, Koc University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(14)Department of Economics, Norwegian School of Economics, Bergen, Norway.
(15)Dirección de Extensión Universitaria, Universidad de La Habana, Havana, 
Cuba.

A concern for fairness is a fundamental and universal element of morality. To 
examine the extent to which cultural norms are integrated into fairness 
cognitions and influence social preferences regarding equality and equity, a 
large sample of children (N 2,163) aged 4-11 were tested in 13 diverse 
countries. Children participated in three versions of a third-party, 
contextualized distributive justice game between two hypothetical recipients 
differing in terms of wealth, merit, and empathy. Social decision-making in 
these games revealed universal age-related shifts from equality-based to 
equity-based distribution motivations across cultures. However, differences in 
levels of individualism and collectivism between the 13 countries predicted the 
age and extent to which children favor equity in each condition. Children from 
the most individualistic cultures endorsed equitable distributions to a greater 
degree than children from more collectivist cultures when recipients differed in 
regards to wealth and merit. However, in an empathy context where recipients 
differed in injury, children from the most collectivist cultures exhibited 
greater preferences to distribute resource equitably compared to children from 
more individualistic cultures. Children from the more individualistic cultures 
also favored equitable distributions at an earlier age than children from more 
collectivist cultures overall. These results demonstrate aspects of both 
cross-cultural similarity and divergence in the development of fairness 
preferences.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12729
PMID: 30207638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12702. doi: 10.1111/desc.12702. Epub 2018 Jul 6.

Worth the wait: Children trade off delay and reward in self- and 
other-benefiting decisions.

Liu S(1), Gonzalez G(2), Warneken F(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(2)Department of Psychology, Boston College, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

Human prosocial behaviors are supported by early-emerging psychological 
processes that detect and fulfill the needs of others. However, little is known 
about the mechanisms that enable children to deliver benefits to others at costs 
to the self, which requires weighing other-regarding and self-serving 
preferences. We used an intertemporal choice paradigm to systematically study 
and compare these behaviors in 5-year-old children. Our results show that 
other-benefiting and self-benefiting behavior share a common decision-making 
process that integrates delay and reward. Specifically, we found that children 
sought to minimize delay and maximize reward, and traded off delays against 
rewards, regardless of whether these rewards were for the children themselves or 
another child. However, we found that children were more willing to invest their 
time to benefit themselves than someone else. Together, these findings show that 
from childhood, other- and self-serving decisions are supported by a general 
mechanism that flexibly integrates information about the magnitude of rewards, 
and the opportunity costs of pursuing them. A video abstract of this article can 
be viewed at: https://youtu.be/r8S0DGe7f8Q.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12702
PMID: 29978941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12674. doi: 10.1111/desc.12674. Epub 2018 Apr 30.

The development of fast-mapping and novel word retention strategies in 
monolingual and bilingual infants.

Kalashnikova M(1), Escudero P(1)(2), Kidd E(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)The MARCS Institute for Brain, Behaviour and Development, Western Sydney 
University, Penrith, Australia.
(2)ARC Centre of Excellence for the Dynamics of Language, Canberra, Australia.
(3)Research School of Psychology, The Australian National University, Canberra, 
Australia.
(4)Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nimegen, The Netherlands.

The mutual exclusivity (ME) assumption is proposed to facilitate early word 
learning by guiding infants to map novel words to novel referents. This study 
assessed the emergence and use of ME to both disambiguate and retain the 
meanings of novel words across development in 18-month-old monolingual and 
bilingual children (Experiment 1; N = 58), and in a sub-group of these children 
again at 24 months of age (Experiment 2: N = 32). Both monolinguals and 
bilinguals employed ME to select the referent of a novel label to a similar 
extent at 18 and 24 months. At 18 months, there were also no differences in 
novel word retention between the two language-background groups. However, at 24 
months, only monolinguals showed the ability to retain these label-object 
mappings. These findings indicate that the development of the ME assumption as a 
reliable word-learning strategy is shaped by children's individual language 
exposure and experience with language use.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12674
PMID: 29707862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):1020-1034. doi: 10.1111/desc.12346. Epub 2015 Oct 21.

Facial speech gestures: the relation between visual speech processing, 
phonological awareness, and developmental dyslexia in 10-year-olds.

Schaadt G(1)(2), Männel C(3), van der Meer E(4)(5), Pannekamp A(4), Friederici 
AD(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and 
Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany. gesa.schaadt@hu-berlin.de.
(2)Department of Psychology, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany. 
gesa.schaadt@hu-berlin.de.
(3)Department of Neuropsychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and 
Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Department of Psychology, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany.
(5)Graduate School of Mind and Brain, Berlin, Germany.

Successful communication in everyday life crucially involves the processing of 
auditory and visual components of speech. Viewing our interlocutor and 
processing visual components of speech facilitates speech processing by 
triggering auditory processing. Auditory phoneme processing, analyzed by 
event-related brain potentials (ERP), has been shown to be associated with 
impairments in reading and spelling (i.e. developmental dyslexia), but visual 
aspects of phoneme processing have not been investigated in individuals with 
such deficits. The present study analyzed the passive visual Mismatch Response 
(vMMR) in school children with and without developmental dyslexia in response to 
video-recorded mouth movements pronouncing syllables silently. Our results 
reveal that both groups of children showed processing of visual speech stimuli, 
but with different scalp distribution. Children without developmental dyslexia 
showed a vMMR with typical posterior distribution. In contrast, children with 
developmental dyslexia showed a vMMR with anterior distribution, which was even 
more pronounced in children with severe phonological deficits and very low 
spelling abilities. As anterior scalp distributions are typically reported for 
auditory speech processing, the anterior vMMR of children with developmental 
dyslexia might suggest an attempt to anticipate potentially upcoming auditory 
speech information in order to support phonological processing, which has been 
shown to be deficient in children with developmental dyslexia.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12346
PMID: 26489969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Dev Sci. 2019 May;22(3):e12775. doi: 10.1111/desc.12775. Epub 2018 Dec 26.

Evidence for a sensitive period in the effects of early life stress on 
hippocampal volume.

Humphreys KL(1), King LS(1), Sacchet MD(1), Camacho MC(1), Colich NL(1), Ordaz 
SJ(1), Ho TC(1), Gotlib IH(1).

Author information:
(1)Stanford University, Stanford, California.

Exposure to stress has been causally linked to changes in hippocampal volume 
(HV). Given that the hippocampus undergoes rapid changes in the first years of 
life, stressful experiences during this period may be particularly important in 
understanding individual differences in the development of the hippocampus. One 
hundred seventy-eight early adolescents (ages 9-13 years; 43% male) were 
interviewed regarding exposure to and age of onset of experiences of stress; the 
severity of each stressful event was rated by an objective panel. All 
participants underwent structural magnetic resonance imaging, from which HVs 
were automatically segmented. Without considering the age of onset for stressful 
experiences, there was a small but statistically significant negative 
association of stress severity with bilateral HV. When considering the age of 
onset, there was a moderate and significant negative association between stress 
severity during early childhood (through 5 years of age) and HV; there was no 
association between stress severity during later childhood (age 6 years and 
older) and HV. We provide evidence of a sensitive period through 5 years of age 
for the effects of life stress on HV in adolescence. It will be important in 
future research to elucidate how reduced HV stemming from early life stress may 
contribute to stress-related health outcomes.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12775
PMCID: PMC6469988
PMID: 30471167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12649. doi: 10.1111/desc.12649. Epub 2018 Jan 4.

Effect of the COMT Val158Met genotype on lateral prefrontal activations in young 
children.

Moriguchi Y(1)(2)(3), Shinohara I(4).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Education, Kyoto University, Yoshidahoncho, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Department of School Education, Joetsu University of Education, 
Yamayashikicho, Joetsu, Japan.
(3)Japan Science and Technology Agency, Kawaguchi, Saitama, Japan.
(4)National Institute for Educational Policy Research of Japan, Chiyodku, Tokyo, 
Japan.

Low executive function (EF) during early childhood is a major risk factor for 
developmental delay, academic failure, and social withdrawal. Susceptible genes 
may affect the molecular and biological mechanisms underpinning EF. More 
specifically, genes associated with the regulation of prefrontal dopamine may 
modulate the response of prefrontal neurons during executive control. Several 
studies with adults and older children have shown that variants of the 
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene are associated with behavioral 
performance and prefrontal activations in EF tasks. However, the effect of the 
COMT genotype on prefrontal activations during EF tasks on young children is 
still unknown. The present study examined whether a common functional 
polymorphism (Val158Met) in the COMT gene was associated with prefrontal 
activations and cognitive shifting in 3- to 6-year-old children. The study 
revealed that, compared with children with at least one Met allele (Met/Met and 
Met/Val), children who were Val homozygous (i) were more able to flexibly switch 
rules in cognitive shifting tasks and (ii) exhibited increased activations in 
lateral prefrontal regions during these tasks. This is the first evidence that 
demonstrates the relationship between a gene polymorphism and prefrontal 
activations in young children. It also indicates that COMT Val homozygosity may 
be advantageous for cognitive shifting and prefrontal functions, at least during 
early childhood, and children who possess this variant may have a lower risk of 
developing future cognitive and social development issues.

© 2018 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12649
PMCID: PMC6175303
PMID: 29314589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12561. doi: 10.1111/desc.12561. Epub 2017 May 2.

Socioeconomic status and hippocampal volume in children and young adults.

Yu Q(1)(2), Daugherty AM(1)(3), Anderson DM(1)(2), Nishimura M(1)(4)(5), Brush 
D(1), Hardwick A(1), Lacey W(1), Raz S(2)(6), Ofen N(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)The Institute of Gerontology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, 48202, 
USA.
(2)Psychology Department, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, 48202, USA.
(3)Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Illinois 
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, 61801, USA.
(4)Psychology, Neuroscience & Behaviour, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, 
Canada.
(5)The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario.
(6)The Merrill Palmer Skillman Institute, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, 
48202, USA.

An individual's socioeconomic status (SES) is often viewed as a proxy for a host 
of environmental influences. SES disparities have been linked to variance in 
brain structures particularly the hippocampus, a neural substrate of learning 
and memory. However, it is unclear whether the association between SES and 
hippocampal volume is similar in children and adults. We investigated the 
relationship between hippocampal volume and SES in a group of children (n = 31, 
age 8-12 years) and a group of young adults (n = 32, age 18-25 years). SES was 
assessed with four indicators that loaded on a single factor, therefore a 
composite SES scores was used in the main analyses. Hippocampal volume was 
measured using manual demarcation on high resolution structural images. SES was 
associated with hippocampal volume in the children, but not in adults, 
suggesting that in childhood, but not adulthood, SES-related environmental 
factors influence hippocampal volume. In addition, hippocampal volume, but not 
SES, was associated with scores on a memory task, suggesting that net effects of 
postnatal environmental factors, captured by SES, are more distal determinants 
of memory performance than hippocampal volume. Longitudinal investigation of the 
association between SES, hippocampal volume and cognitive functioning may 
further our understanding of the putative neural mechanisms underlying 
SES-related environmental effects on cognitive development.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12561
PMCID: PMC5668203
PMID: 28464381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12579. doi: 10.1111/desc.12579. Epub 2017 Jul 26.

Differences in brain morphology and working memory capacity across childhood.

Bathelt J(1), Gathercole SE(1), Johnson A(1), Astle DE(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK.

Working memory (WM) skills are closely associated with learning progress in key 
areas such as reading and mathematics across childhood. As yet, however, little 
is known about how the brain systems underpinning WM develop over this critical 
developmental period. The current study investigated whether and how structural 
brain correlates of components of the working memory system change over 
development. Verbal and visuospatial short-term and working memory were assessed 
in 153 children between 5.58 and 15.92 years, and latent components of the 
working memory system were derived. Fractional anisotropy and cortical thickness 
maps were derived from T1-weighted and diffusion-weighted MRI and processed 
using eigenanatomy decomposition. There was a greater involvement of the corpus 
callosum and posterior temporal white matter in younger children for performance 
associated with the executive part of the working memory system. For older 
children, this was more closely linked with the thickness of the 
occipitotemporal cortex. These findings suggest that increasing specialization 
leads to shifts in the contribution of neural substrates over childhood, moving 
from an early dependence on a distributed system supported by long-range 
connections to later reliance on specialized local circuitry. Our findings 
demonstrate that despite the component factor structure being stable across 
childhood, the underlying brain systems supporting working memory change. Taking 
the age of the child into account, and not just their overall score, is likely 
to be critical for understanding the nature of the limitations on their working 
memory capacity.

© 2017 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12579
PMCID: PMC5947821
PMID: 28748537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Dev Sci. 2019 May;22(3):e12763. doi: 10.1111/desc.12763. Epub 2018 Dec 6.

The relation between infant freezing and the development of internalizing 
symptoms in adolescence: A prospective longitudinal study.

Niermann HCM(1)(2), Tyborowska A(1)(2), Cillessen AHN(1), van Donkelaar 
MM(2)(3), Lammertink F(1), Gunnar MR(4), Franke B(2)(3)(5), Figner B(1)(2), 
Roelofs K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(4)Institute of Child Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.

Given the long-lasting detrimental effects of internalizing symptoms, there is 
great need for detecting early risk markers. One promising marker is freezing 
behavior. Whereas initial freezing reactions are essential for coping with 
threat, prolonged freezing has been associated with internalizing 
psychopathology. However, it remains unknown whether early life alterations in 
freezing reactions predict changes in internalizing symptoms during adolescent 
development. In a longitudinal study (N = 116), we tested prospectively whether 
observed freezing in infancy predicted the development of internalizing symptoms 
from childhood through late adolescence (until age 17). Both longer and absent 
infant freezing behavior during a standard challenge (robot-confrontation task) 
were associated with internalizing symptoms in adolescence. Specifically, absent 
infant freezing predicted a relative increase in internalizing symptoms 
consistently across development from relatively low symptom levels in childhood 
to relatively high levels in late adolescence. Longer infant freezing also 
predicted a relative increase in internalizing symptoms, but only up until early 
adolescence. This latter effect was moderated by peer stress and was followed by 
a later decrease in internalizing symptoms. The findings suggest that early 
deviations in defensive freezing responses signal risk for internalizing 
symptoms and may constitute important markers in future stress vulnerability and 
resilience studies.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12763
PMID: 30318656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12643. doi: 10.1111/desc.12643. Epub 2018 Jan 22.

Phonological processing during silent reading in teenagers who are deaf/hard of 
hearing: an eye movement investigation.

Blythe HI(1), Dickins JH(1), Kennedy CR(2), Liversedge SP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.

There has been considerable variability within the literature concerning the 
extent to which deaf/hard of hearing individuals are able to process 
phonological codes during reading. Two experiments are reported in which 
participants' eye movements were recorded as they read sentences containing 
correctly spelled words (e.g., church), pseudohomophones (e.g., cherch), and 
spelling controls (e.g., charch). We examined both foveal processing and 
parafoveal pre-processing of phonology for three participant groups-teenagers 
with permanent childhood hearing loss (PCHL), chronological age-matched 
controls, and reading age-matched controls. The teenagers with PCHL showed a 
pseudohomophone advantage from both directly fixated words and parafoveal 
preview, similar to their hearing peers. These data provide strong evidence for 
phonological recoding during silent reading in teenagers with PCHL.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12643
PMID: 29356239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12662. doi: 10.1111/desc.12662. Epub 2018 Mar 13.

Children's academic attainment is linked to the global organization of the white 
matter connectome.

Bathelt J(1), Gathercole SE(1), Butterfield S(1); CALM team, Astle DE(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge University, Cambridge, UK.

Literacy and numeracy are important skills that are typically learned during 
childhood, a time that coincides with considerable shifts in large-scale brain 
organization. However, most studies emphasize focal brain contributions to 
literacy and numeracy development by employing case-control designs and 
voxel-by-voxel statistical comparisons. This approach has been valuable, but may 
underestimate the contribution of overall brain network organization. The 
current study includes children (N = 133 children; 86 male; mean age = 9.42, SD 
= 1.715; age range = 5.92-13.75y) with a broad range of abilities, and uses 
whole-brain structural connectomics based on diffusion-weighted MRI data. The 
results indicate that academic attainment is associated with differences in 
structural brain organization, something not seen when focusing on the integrity 
of specific regions. Furthermore, simulated disruption of highly-connected brain 
regions known as hubs suggests that the role of these regions for maintaining 
the architecture of the network may be more important than specific aspects of 
processing. Our findings indicate that distributed brain systems contribute to 
the etiology of difficulties with academic learning, which cannot be captured 
using a more traditional voxel-wise statistical approach.

© 2018 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12662
PMCID: PMC6175394
PMID: 29532626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12719. doi: 10.1111/desc.12719. Epub 2018 Aug 29.

School climate is associated with cortical thickness and executive function in 
children and adolescents.

Piccolo LR(1), Merz EC(1), Noble KG(1); Pediatric Imaging, Neurocognition, and 
Genetics Study.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biobehavioral Sciences, Teachers College, Columbia University, 
New York.

A positive school climate has been found to support mental and physical health, 
academic achievement and social adjustment among youth. However, links between 
school climate and brain structure have not been investigated to date. In this 
study, we investigated whether school climate was associated with executive 
function (EF) and brain structure (cortical thickness and surface area) in 
children and adolescents. We further examined whether these links varied as a 
function of socioeconomic background. Participants who ranged from 9 to 18 years 
of age (N = 108) completed EF tasks and a high-resolution, 3-Tesla, T1-weighted 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan. Overall school climate, academic support, 
and family socioeconomic background were assessed using questionnaires. Higher 
academic support was associated with greater EF task performance and increased 
global cortical thickness. Additionally, academic support moderated the 
association between family income and EF, such that children from lower income 
families performed similarly to their more advantaged peers on EF tasks in the 
context of positive academic support. This work is the first to link school 
climate to brain structure and contributes to the growing body of evidence 
suggesting that academic support may be an important protective factor in the 
context of socioeconomic disadvantage.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12719
PMCID: PMC6294656
PMID: 30156357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12726. doi: 10.1111/desc.12726. Epub 2018 Sep 5.

Withstanding the test of time: Multisensory cues improve the delayed retention 
of incidental learning.

Broadbent HJ(1), Osborne T(1), Mareschal D(1), Kirkham NZ(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Birkbeck, University of London, 
London, UK.

Multisensory tools are commonly employed within educational settings (e.g. 
Carter & Stephenson, ), and there is a growing body of literature advocating the 
benefits of presenting children with multisensory information over unisensory 
cues for learning (Baker & Jordan, ; Jordan & Baker, ). This is even the case 
when the informative cues are only arbitrarily related (Broadbent, White, 
Mareschal, & Kirkham, ). However, the delayed retention of learning following 
exposure to multisensory compared to unisensory cues has not been evaluated, and 
has important implications for the utility of multisensory educational tools. 
This study examined the retention of incidental categorical learning in 5-, 7- 
and 9-year-olds (N = 181) using either unisensory or multisensory cues. Results 
found significantly greater retention of learning following multisensory cue 
exposure than with unisensory information when category knowledge was tested 
following a 24-hour period of delay. No age-related changes were found, 
suggesting that multisensory information can facilitate the retention of 
learning across this age range.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12726
PMID: 30184309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12691. doi: 10.1111/desc.12691. Epub 2018 Jun 4.

Age-related change in brain rhythms from early to middle childhood: Links to 
executive function.

Perone S(1), Palanisamy J(2), Carlson SM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Development, Washington State University, Pullman, 
Washington, USA.
(2)Institute of Child Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, USA.

The connection between brain rhythms at rest and cognition remains poorly 
understood. This is especially true during early childhood in which neuroimaging 
data are relatively scarce. We developed a new method for collecting eyes closed 
and eyes open resting state electroencephalography (EEG) suitable for young 
children. We report results characterizing age-related change in power in 
multiple brain rhythms over frontal and posterior regions under eyes closed and 
open conditions of rest in 3-, 4-, 5- and 9-year-old children (N = 162). We 
observed two key patterns of results. First, with age theta decreased, alpha 
increased, and alpha peak frequency increased. Second, power was generally 
higher when eyes were closed than open for theta and alpha but higher when eyes 
were open than closed for beta and gamma. We also investigated the relation 
between resting state EEG activity and executive function (EF) using the 
Minnesota Executive Function Scale, a standardized behavioral measure of EF for 
ages 2 and up. Correlational and regression analyses showed that individual 
differences in the theta/beta ratio is associated with EF even after controlling 
for children's age and verbal abilities. We situate our results in a theoretical 
discussion of theta/beta and its role in control processes.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12691
PMID: 29863816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Dev Sci. 2019 Mar;22(2):e12748. doi: 10.1111/desc.12748. Epub 2018 Oct 8.

The malleability of executive function in early childhood: Effects of schooling 
and targeted training.

Zhang Q(1), Wang C(1), Zhao Q(2), Yang L(1), Buschkuehl M(3), Jaeggi SM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Behavioral Sciences, Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou, China.
(2)Hangzhou No. 4 High School, Hangzhou, China.
(3)MIND Research Institute, Irvine, California.
(4)School of Education, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, California.

Executive function (EF), its importance for scholastic achievement and the 
question of whether or not EF is malleable, have become a topic of intense 
interest. Education or schooling is often seen as effective approaches to 
enhance EF due to the specific school-related requirements as compared to 
kindergarten or pre-school. However, no study to date has investigated whether 
targeted training focusing on those domains might be comparable with regular 
schooling in improving EF and fluid intelligence (Gf). The aim of the present 
study was to replicate and extend the previously demonstrated schooling effects 
on EF by using a school-cutoff design, and to further investigate whether a 
theoretically motivated intervention targeting specific EF, i.e., working memory 
(WM) or inhibitory control (IC), could achieve comparable effects with schooling 
in both, WM and IC, as well as Gf. 91 6-year-old kindergarteners and 
first-graders with similar chronological age participated the study. We compared 
the performance of a first-grade schooling group with that of two kindergarten 
training groups as well as a business-as-usual kindergarten control group. 
Participants were assessed in WM, IC and Gf at baseline, immediately after the 
intervention (posttest), as well as 3 months after training completion 
(follow-up). The results showed that the schooling group indeed outperformed the 
kindergarten groups at baseline in several cognitive tasks. Furthermore, both 
the WM and IC training showed pronounced gains in the trained tasks, as well as 
varying degrees of improvement in non-trained outcome measures. Most 
importantly, both training groups achieved comparable performance with the 
schooling group, which was especially apparent in Gf at follow-up. Our findings 
provide further evidence for the malleability of EF demonstrating that both, 
long-term and short-term interventions can facilitate the acquisition of those 
important skills, and as such, our work has important implications for 
educational practice.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12748
PMCID: PMC6408936
PMID: 30171785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Dev Sci. 2019 Mar;22(2):e12739. doi: 10.1111/desc.12739. Epub 2018 Sep 21.

Children's biobehavioral reactivity to challenge predicts DNA methylation in 
adolescence and emerging adulthood.

Goodman SJ(1)(2), Roubinov DS(3), Bush NR(3)(4), Park M(1)(5), Farré P(6), 
Emberly E(6), Hertzman C(5)(7), Essex MJ(8), Kobor MS(1)(2)(7)(9), Boyce 
WT(3)(4)(9).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, BC Children's Hospital 
Research, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(2)Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(3)Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, California.
(4)Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, California.
(5)School of Population and Public Health, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(6)Physics, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada.
(7)Human Early Learning Partnership, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
BC, Canada.
(8)Psychiatry, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, 
Madison, Wisconsin.
(9)Child and Brain Development Program, Canadian Institute for Advanced 
Research, Toronto, ON, Canada.

A growing body of research has documented associations between adverse childhood 
environments and DNA methylation, highlighting epigenetic processes as potential 
mechanisms through which early external contexts influence health across the 
life course. The present study tested a complementary hypothesis: indicators of 
children's early internal, biological, and behavioral responses to stressful 
challenges may also be linked to stable patterns of DNA methylation later in 
life. Children's autonomic nervous system reactivity, temperament, and mental 
health symptoms were prospectively assessed from infancy through early 
childhood, and principal components analysis (PCA) was applied to derive 
composites of biological and behavioral reactivity. Buccal epithelial cells were 
collected from participants at 15 and 18 years of age. Findings revealed an 
association between early life biobehavioral inhibition/disinhibition and DNA 
methylation across many genes. Notably, reactive, inhibited children were found 
to have decreased DNA methylation of the DLX5 and IGF2 genes at both time 
points, as compared to non-reactive, disinhibited children. Results of the 
present study are provisional but suggest that the gene's profile of DNA 
methylation may constitute a biomarker of normative or potentially pathological 
differences in reactivity. Overall, findings provide a foundation for future 
research to explore relations among epigenetic processes and differences in both 
individual-level biobehavioral risk and qualities of the early, external 
childhood environment.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12739
PMCID: PMC6433477
PMID: 30176105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12671. doi: 10.1111/desc.12671. Epub 2018 Apr 24.

Cognitive predictors of children's development in mathematics achievement: A 
latent growth modeling approach.

Xenidou-Dervou I(1)(2), Van Luit JEH(3), Kroesbergen EH(3)(4), Friso-van den Bos 
I(3), Jonkman LM(5), van der Schoot M(2), van Lieshout ECDM(2).

Author information:
(1)Mathematics Education Centre, Loughborough University, Loughborough, 
Leicestershire, UK.
(2)Section of Educational Neuroscience, and LEARN! Research Institute, Faculty 
of Behavioral and Movement Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Educational and Learning Sciences, Faculty of Social and 
Behavioral Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Faculty of Psychology and Neuroscience, 
Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Research has identified various domain-general and domain-specific cognitive 
abilities as predictors of children's individual differences in mathematics 
achievement. However, research into the predictors of children's individual 
growth rates, namely between-person differences in within-person change in 
mathematics achievement is scarce. We assessed 334 children's domain-general and 
mathematics-specific early cognitive abilities and their general mathematics 
achievement longitudinally across four time-points within the first and second 
grades of primary school. As expected, a constellation of multiple cognitive 
abilities contributed to the children's starting level of mathematical success. 
Specifically, latent growth modeling revealed that WM abilities, IQ, counting 
skills, nonsymbolic and symbolic approximate arithmetic and comparison skills 
explained individual differences in the children's initial status on a 
curriculum-based general mathematics achievement test. Surprisingly, however, 
only one out of all the assessed cognitive abilities was a unique predictor of 
the children's individual growth rates in mathematics achievement: their 
performance in the symbolic approximate addition task. In this task, children 
were asked to estimate the sum of two large numbers and decide if this estimated 
sum was smaller or larger compared to a third number. Our findings demonstrate 
the importance of multiple domain-general and mathematics-specific cognitive 
skills for identifying children at risk of struggling with mathematics and 
highlight the significance of early approximate arithmetic skills for the 
development of one's mathematical success. We argue the need for more research 
focus on explaining children's individual growth rates in mathematics 
achievement.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12671
PMID: 29691952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12701. doi: 10.1111/desc.12701. Epub 2018 Jul 16.

Language experience influences audiovisual speech integration in unimodal and 
bimodal bilingual infants.

Mercure E(1), Kushnerenko E(2), Goldberg L(1), Bowden-Howl H(1)(3), Coulson 
K(1)(4), Johnson MH(5)(6), MacSweeney M(1).

Author information:
(1)UCL Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, London, UK.
(2)School of Psychology, University of East London, London, UK.
(3)School of Psychology, University of Plymouth, Plymouth, UK.
(4)Department of Psychology and Sports Sciences, University of Hertfordshire, 
Hatfield, Hertfordshire, UK.
(5)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Birkbeck - University of London, 
London, UK.
(6)Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Infants as young as 2 months can integrate audio and visual aspects of speech 
articulation. A shift of attention from the eyes towards the mouth of talking 
faces occurs around 6 months of age in monolingual infants. However, it is 
unknown whether this pattern of attention during audiovisual speech processing 
is influenced by speech and language experience in infancy. The present study 
investigated this question by analysing audiovisual speech processing in three 
groups of 4- to 8-month-old infants who differed in their language experience: 
monolinguals, unimodal bilinguals (infants exposed to two or more spoken 
languages) and bimodal bilinguals (hearing infants with Deaf mothers). 
Eye-tracking was used to study patterns of face scanning while infants were 
viewing faces articulating syllables with congruent, incongruent and silent 
auditory tracks. Monolinguals and unimodal bilinguals increased their attention 
to the mouth of talking faces between 4 and 8 months, while bimodal bilinguals 
did not show any age difference in their scanning patterns. Moreover, older (6.6 
to 8 months), but not younger, monolinguals (4 to 6.5 months) showed increased 
visual attention to the mouth of faces articulating audiovisually incongruent 
rather than congruent faces, indicating surprise or novelty. In contrast, no 
audiovisual congruency effect was found in unimodal or bimodal bilinguals. 
Results suggest that speech and language experience influences audiovisual 
integration in infancy. Specifically, reduced or more variable experience of 
audiovisual speech from the primary caregiver may lead to less sensitivity to 
the integration of audio and visual cues of speech articulation.

© 2018 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12701
PMCID: PMC6393757
PMID: 30014580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e13003. doi: 10.1111/desc.13003. Epub 2020 Jul 24.

Arithmetic knowledge from the spontaneous attention to relations.

Prather R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology, University of 
Maryland, College Park, MD, USA.

Children's knowledge of arithmetic principles is a key aspect of early 
mathematics knowledge. Knowledge of arithmetic principles predicts how children 
approach solving arithmetic problems and the likelihood of their success. Prior 
work has begun to address how children might learn arithmetic principles in a 
classroom setting. Understanding of arithmetic principles involves understanding 
how numbers in arithmetic equations relate to another. For example, the Relation 
to Operands (RO) principle is that for subtracting natural numbers (A - B = C), 
the difference (C) must be smaller than the minuend (A). In the current study we 
evaluate if individual differences in arithmetic principle knowledge (APK) can 
be predicted by the learners' spontaneous attention to relations (SAR) and if 
feedback can increase their attention to relations. Results suggest that 
participants' Spontaneous Attention to Number (SAN) does not predict their 
knowledge of the RO principle for symbolic arithmetic. Feedback regarding the 
attention to relations did not show a significant effect on SAR or participants' 
APK. We also did not find significant relations between reports of parent talk 
and the home environment with individual differences in SAN. The amount of 
parent's talk about relations was not significantly associated with learner's 
SAR and APK. We conclude that children's SAR with non-symbolic number does not 
generalize to attention to relations with symbolic arithmetic.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13003
PMID: 32511820


343. Dev Sci. 2017 Jan;20(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12502. Epub 2016 Oct 23.

Executive functioning in Spanish- and English-speaking Head Start preschoolers.

White LJ(1), Greenfield DB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Miami, USA.

A growing percentage of low-income children in the United States come from 
Spanish-speaking homes and are dual language learners (DLLs). Recent research 
shows that bilingual children, compared to monolinguals, have enhanced executive 
functioning (EF), a set of foundational cognitive skills that predict higher 
social-emotional competence and academic achievement in preschool and beyond. 
Although this association has been found among children of different 
backgrounds, no study to date has assessed whether bilingual Latino preschoolers 
from low-income backgrounds have higher EF than their monolingual peers and 
their emerging bilingual peers, respectively. The current study assessed 303 
predominantly Latino Head Start preschoolers (83.5% Latino and 13.5% African 
American) to examine this relationship. Using a language screener, three groups 
were formed (148 Spanish-English bilinguals, 83 English monolinguals, and 72 
Spanish-dominant emerging bilinguals) and subsequently compared on a latent 
factor of EF. As predicted, results indicated that the bilingual group 
outperformed the monolingual English group on EF. Implications for the findings 
of the lack of EF differences between the Spanish-dominant emerging bilinguals 
and the other two groups are also discussed. This study advances our 
understanding of the intersection between language and cognitive development for 
young low-income Latino DLLs growing up in the United States and highlights 
bilingualism as a potential advantage in this population. A video abstract of 
this article can be viewed at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J2Eq_MwLRfQ.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12502
PMID: 27774743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Dev Sci. 2019 May;22(3):e12770. doi: 10.1111/desc.12770. Epub 2018 Dec 11.

Maternal discourse continuity and infants' actions organize 12-month-olds' 
language exposure during object play.

Chang LM(1), Deák GO(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Science, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, California.

Infant language learning depends on the distribution of co-occurrences within 
language-between words and other words-and between language content and events 
in the world. Yet infant-directed speech is not limited to words that refer to 
perceivable objects and actions. Rather, caregivers' utterances contain a range 
of syntactic forms and expressions with diverse attentional, regulatory, social, 
and referential functions. We conducted a distributional analysis of linguistic 
content types at the utterance level, and demonstrated that a wide range of 
content types in maternal speech can be distinguished by their distribution in 
sequences of utterances and by their patterns of co-occurrence with infants' 
actions. We observed free-play sessions of 38 12-month-old infants and their 
mothers, annotated maternal utterances for 10 content types, and coded infants' 
gaze target and object handling. Results show that all content types tended to 
repeat in consecutive utterances, whereas preferred transitions between 
different content types reflected sequences from attention-capturing to 
directing and then descriptive utterances. Specific content types were 
associated with infants' engagement with objects (declaratives, descriptions, 
object names), with disengagement from objects (talk about attention, infant's 
name), and with infants' gaze at the mother (affirmations). We discuss how 
structured discourse might facilitate language acquisition by making speech 
input more predictable and/or by providing clues about high-level form-function 
mappings.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12770
PMID: 30414222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12566. doi: 10.1111/desc.12566. Epub 2017 Jun 16.

Young children discover how to deceive in 10 days: a microgenetic study.

Ding XP(1)(2), Heyman GD(3)(4), Fu G(1), Zhu B(4), Lee K(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Hangzhou Normal University, China.
(2)Department of Psychology, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, Zhejiang Normal University.
(5)Dr Eric Jackman Institute of Child Study, University of Toronto, Canada.

We investigated how the ability to deceive emerges in early childhood among a 
sample of young preschoolers (Mean age = 34.7 months). We did this via a 
10-session microgenetic method that took place over a 10-day period. In each 
session, children played a zero-sum game against an adult to win treats. In the 
game, children hid the treats and had opportunities (10 trials) to win them by 
providing deceptive information about their whereabouts to the adult. Although 
children initially showed little or no ability to deceive, most spontaneously 
discovered deception and systematically used it to win the game by the tenth 
day. Both theory of mind and executive function skills were predictive of 
relatively faster patterns of discovery. These results are the first to provide 
evidence for the importance of cognitive skills and social experience in the 
discovery of deception over time in early childhood.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12566
PMCID: PMC5732890
PMID: 28620940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12624. doi: 10.1111/desc.12624. Epub 2017 Sep 24.

Developmental associations between bilingual experience and inhibitory control 
trajectories in Head Start children.

Santillán J(1), Khurana A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA.

Children from lower socioeconomic (SES) backgrounds tend to be at-risk for 
executive function (EF) impairments by the time they are in preschool, placing 
them at an early disadvantage for academic success. The present study examined 
the potentially protective role of bilingual experience on the development of 
inhibitory control (IC) in 1146 Head Start preschoolers who were followed for an 
18-month period during the transition to kindergarten as part of the 
longitudinal Family and Child Experiences Survey (FACES) 2009 study. Using three 
waves of data, we predicted individual variation in developmental trajectories 
of IC for three groups that differed in bilingual experience-English 
monolinguals, Spanish-English bilinguals, and a group of children who 
transitioned from being Spanish monolingual to Spanish-English bilinguals during 
the course of the study. Compared to their English monolingual peers, bilingual 
children from Spanish-speaking homes showed higher IC performance at Head Start 
entry, as well as steeper IC growth over time. Children who were Spanish 
monolingual at the beginning of Head Start showed the lowest IC performance at 
baseline. However, their rate of IC growth exceeded that of children who 
remained English monolingual and did not differ from that of their peers who 
entered Head Start being bilingual. These results suggest that acquiring 
bilingualism and continued bilingual experience are associated with more rapid 
IC development during the transition from preschool to kindergarten in children 
from lower SES backgrounds.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12624
PMID: 28944614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12723. doi: 10.1111/desc.12723. Epub 2018 Sep 12.

Longitudinal relationships between speech perception, phonological skills and 
reading in children at high-risk of dyslexia.

Snowling MJ(1), Lervåg A(2), Nash HM(3), Hulme C(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)Department of Education, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
(4)Department of Education, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Speech perception deficits are commonly reported in dyslexia but longitudinal 
evidence that poor speech perception compromises learning to read is scant. We 
assessed the hypothesis that phonological skills, specifically phoneme awareness 
and RAN, mediate the relationship between speech perception and reading. We 
assessed longitudinal predictive relationships between categorical speech 
perception, phoneme awareness, RAN, language, attention and reading at ages 5½ 
and 6½ years in 237 children many of whom were at high risk of reading 
difficulties. Speech perception at 5½ years correlated with language, attention, 
phoneme awareness and RAN concurrently and was a predictor of reading at 6½ 
years. There was no significant indirect effect of speech perception on reading 
via phoneme awareness, suggesting that its effects are separable from those of 
phoneme awareness. Children classified with dyslexia at 8 years had poorer 
speech perception than age-controls at 5½ years and children with language 
disorders (with or without dyslexia) had more severe difficulties with both 
speech perception and attention control. Categorical speech perception tasks tap 
factors extraneous to perception, including decision-making skills. Further 
longitudinal studies are needed to unravel the complex relationships between 
categorical speech perception tasks and measures of reading and language and 
attention.

© 2018 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12723
PMCID: PMC6492008
PMID: 30207641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12651. doi: 10.1111/desc.12651. Epub 2018 Jan 14.

Infant brain responses to felt and observed touch of hands and feet: an MEG 
study.

Meltzoff AN(1), Ramírez RR(1), Saby JN(1), Larson E(1), Taulu S(1)(2), Marshall 
PJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Learning & Brain Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA, USA.
(2)Department of Physics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

There is growing interest concerning the ways in which the human body, both 
one's own and that of others, is represented in the developing human brain. In 
two experiments with 7-month-old infants, we employed advances in infant 
magnetoencephalography (MEG) brain imaging to address novel questions concerning 
body representations in early development. Experiment 1 evaluated the 
spatiotemporal organization of infants' brain responses to being touched. A 
punctate touch to infants' hands and feet produced significant activation in the 
hand and foot areas of contralateral primary somatosensory cortex as well as in 
other parietal and frontal areas. Experiment 2 explored infant brain responses 
to visually perceiving another person's hand or foot being touched. Results 
showed significant activation in early visual regions and also in regions 
thought to be involved in multisensory body and self-other processing. 
Furthermore, observed touch of the hand and foot activated the infant's own 
primary somatosensory cortex, although less consistently than felt touch. These 
findings shed light on aspects of early social cognition, including action 
imitation, which may build, at least in part, on infant neural representations 
that map equivalences between the bodies of self and other.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12651
PMCID: PMC6045975
PMID: 29333688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12692. doi: 10.1111/desc.12692. Epub 2018 Jul 6.

Contributions of mothers' and fathers' parenting to children's self-regulation: 
Evidence from an adoption study.

Bridgett DJ(1), Ganiban JM(2), Neiderhiser JM(3), Natsuaki MN(4), Shaw DS(5), 
Reiss D(6), Leve LD(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois.
(2)Department of Psychology, George Washington University, Washington, DC.
(3)Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State University, Pennsylvania.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of California, Riverside, California.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(6)Child Study Center, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut.
(7)Department of Counseling Psychology and Human Services, University of Oregon, 
Eugen, Oregon.

The origins of top-down self-regulation are attributed to genetic and 
socialization factors as evidenced by high heritability estimates from twin 
studies and the influential role of parenting. However, recent evidence suggests 
that parenting behavior itself is affected by parents' own top-down 
self-regulation. Because children's top-down self-regulation is influenced by 
genetic factors and parenting is influenced by top-down self-regulation, the 
effects of parenting on children's top-down self-regulation identified in prior 
studies may partially reflect passive gene-environment correlation. The goal of 
this study was to examine parenting influences on children's top-down 
self-regulation using a longitudinal, adoption-at-birth design, a method of 
identifying parenting influences that are independent of the role of shared 
genetic influences on children's characteristics because adoptive parents are 
genetically unrelated to their adopted child. Participants (N = 361) included 
adoptive families and biological mothers of adopted children. Adoptive mothers' 
and fathers' harsh/negative parenting were assessed when children were 27 months 
of age and biological mothers' top-down self-regulation was assessed when 
children were 54 months of age. Adopted children's top-down self-regulation was 
assessed when they were 54 and 72 months of age. Results, accounting for child 
gender, biological mother top-down self-regulation, and the potential evocative 
effects of adopted child anger, provide evidence that inherited influences and 
socialization processes uniquely contribute to children's top-down 
self-regulation. Furthermore, findings demonstrate the importance of both 
mother's and father's parenting behavior as an influence on young children's 
top-down self-regulation. The implications of these findings for understanding 
the complex mechanisms that influence children's top-down self-regulation are 
discussed.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12692
PMCID: PMC6202135
PMID: 29978935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12697. doi: 10.1111/desc.12697. Epub 2018 Jul 24.

Semantic detail in the developing verb lexicon: An extension of Naigles and Kako 
(1993).

Arunachalam S(1), Dennis S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, Boston University, 
Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Bath, Bath, UK.

Verbs are often uttered before the events they describe. By 2 years of age, 
toddlers can learn from such an encounter. Hearing a novel verb in transitive 
sentences (e.g. The boy lorped the cat), even with no visual referent present, 
they later map it to a causative meaning (e.g. feed) (e.g. Yuan & Fisher, ). How 
much semantic detail does their verb representation include on this first, 
underinformative, encounter? Is the representation sparse, including only 
information for which they have evidence, or do toddlers make more specific 
guesses about the verb's meaning? In two experiments (N = 76, mean age 27 
months), we address this using an event type studied by Naigles and Kako (); 
they found that when toddlers hear a novel transitive verb while simultaneously 
viewing a non-causative referent-a contact event such as patting-they map the 
verb to the contact event. In Experiment 1 we replicated this basic result. 
Further, toddlers' representations persisted over a 5-minute delay, manifesting 
again during a retest. In Experiment 2, toddlers heard the verbs while watching 
two actors converse instead of while seeing contact events. At test, they showed 
no evidence of mapping the verbs to contact events, either initially or after a 
5-minute delay, despite that in prior work they mapped verbs to causative events 
under identical circumstances. We infer that on hearing a novel verb in a 
transitive frame, absent a relevant visual scene, toddlers posit a more specific 
representation than the evidence requires-one that incorporates causative 
semantics. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at: 
https://youtu.be/aRCqSTbr6Bw.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12697
PMCID: PMC6294682
PMID: 30039901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12661. doi: 10.1111/desc.12661. Epub 2018 May 3.

Visual search and autism symptoms: What young children search for and 
co-occurring ADHD matter.

Doherty BR(1), Charman T(2), Johnson MH(3), Scerif G(1), Gliga T(3); BASIS 
Team(1)(3)(2)(4)(5).

Collaborators: Baron-Cohen S, Bedford R, Bolton P, Blasi A, Cheung C, Dalmaijer 
E, Davies K, Elsabbagh M, Fernandes J, Gammer I, Guiraud J, Johnson MH, Liew M, 
Lloyd-Fox S, Maris H, Hara L, Pasco G, Pickles A, Ribeiro H, Salomone E, Tucker 
L, Yemane F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology& Neuroscience, King's College London, 
London, UK.
(3)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Birkbeck College, University of 
London, London, UK.
(4)Autism Research Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

Superior visual search is one of the most common findings in the autism spectrum 
disorder (ASD) literature. Here, we ascertain how generalizable these findings 
are across task and participant characteristics, in light of recent replication 
failures. We tested 106 3-year-old children at familial risk for ASD, a sample 
that presents high ASD and ADHD symptoms, and 25 control participants, in three 
multi-target search conditions: easy exemplar search (look for cats amongst 
artefacts), difficult exemplar search (look for dogs amongst chairs/tables 
perceptually similar to dogs), and categorical search (look for animals amongst 
artefacts). Performance was related to dimensional measures of ASD and ADHD, in 
agreement with current research domain criteria (RDoC). We found that ASD 
symptom severity did not associate with enhanced performance in search, but did 
associate with poorer categorical search in particular, consistent with 
literature describing impairments in categorical knowledge in ASD. Furthermore, 
ASD and ADHD symptoms were both associated with more disorganized search paths 
across all conditions. Thus, ASD traits do not always convey an advantage in 
visual search; on the contrary, ASD traits may be associated with difficulties 
in search depending upon the nature of the stimuli (e.g., exemplar vs. 
categorical search) and the presence of co-occurring symptoms.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12661
PMID: 29726058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12648. doi: 10.1111/desc.12648. Epub 2018 Mar 8.

Functional neuroanatomy of gesture-speech integration in children varies with 
individual differences in gesture processing.

Demir-Lira ÖE(1), Asaridou SS(2), Raja Beharelle A(3), Holt AE(2), Goldin-Meadow 
S(1), Small SL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The University of Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, 
California, USA.
(3)Laboratory for Social and Neural Systems Research, Department of Economics, 
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Gesture is an integral part of children's communicative repertoire. However, 
little is known about the neurobiology of speech and gesture integration in the 
developing brain. We investigated how 8- to 10-year-old children processed 
gesture that was essential to understanding a set of narratives. We asked 
whether the functional neuroanatomy of gesture-speech integration varies as a 
function of (1) the content of speech, and/or (2) individual differences in how 
gesture is processed. When gestures provided missing information not present in 
the speech (i.e., disambiguating gesture; e.g., "pet" + flapping palms = bird), 
the presence of gesture led to increased activity in inferior frontal gyri, the 
right middle temporal gyrus, and the left superior temporal gyrus, compared to 
when gesture provided redundant information (i.e., reinforcing gesture; e.g., 
"bird" + flapping palms = bird). This pattern of activation was found only in 
children who were able to successfully integrate gesture and speech 
behaviorally, as indicated by their performance on post-test story comprehension 
questions. Children who did not glean meaning from gesture did not show 
differential activation across the two conditions. Our results suggest that the 
brain activation pattern for gesture-speech integration in children overlaps 
with-but is broader than-the pattern in adults performing the same task. 
Overall, our results provide a possible neurobiological mechanism that could 
underlie children's increasing ability to integrate gesture and speech over 
childhood, and account for individual differences in that integration.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12648
PMCID: PMC6959524
PMID: 29516653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Dev Sci. 2019 May;22(3):e12768. doi: 10.1111/desc.12768. Epub 2018 Nov 28.

Altered lateralization of dorsal language tracts in 6-week-old infants at risk 
for autism.

Liu J(1)(2)(3), Tsang T(2)(3)(4), Jackson L(2)(3)(5), Ponting C(3)(4)(5), Jeste 
SS(2)(5), Bookheimer SY(2)(4)(5)(6), Dapretto M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, University of California, Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
(3)Ahmanson-Lovelace Brain Mapping Center, University of California, Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
California.
(5)Semel Institute of Neuroscience and Human Behavior, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
(6)Center for Cognitive Neurosciences, University of California, Los Angeles, 
Los Angeles, California.

Altered structural connectivity has been identified as a possible biomarker of 
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) risk in the developing brain. Core features of 
ASD include impaired social communication and early language delay. Thus, 
examining white matter tracts associated with language may lend further insight 
into early signs of ASD risk and the mechanisms that underlie language 
impairments associated with the disorder. Evidence of altered structural 
connectivity has previously been detected in 6-month-old infants at high 
familial risk for developing ASD. However, as language processing begins in 
utero, differences in structural connectivity between language regions may be 
present in the early infant brain shortly after birth. Here we investigated key 
white matter pathways of the dorsal language network in 6-week-old infants at 
high (HR) and low (LR) risk for ASD to identify atypicalities in structural 
connectivity that may predict altered developmental trajectories prior to overt 
language delays and the onset of ASD symptomatology. Compared to HR infants, LR 
infants showed higher fractional anisotropy (FA) in the left superior 
longitudinal fasciculus (SLF); in contrast, in the right SLF, HR infants showed 
higher FA than LR infants. Additionally, HR infants showed more rightward 
lateralization of the SLF. Across both groups, measures of FA and lateralization 
of these pathways at 6 weeks of age were related to later language development 
at 18 months of age as well as ASD symptomatology at 36 months of age. These 
findings indicate that early differences in the structure of language pathways 
may provide an early predictor of future language development and ASD risk.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12768
PMCID: PMC6470045
PMID: 30372577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.


354. Dev Sci. 2019 May;22(3):e12773. doi: 10.1111/desc.12773. Epub 2018 Dec 21.

Language counts: Early language mediates the relationship between parent 
education and children's math ability.

Slusser E(1), Ribner A(2), Shusterman A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Child & Adolescent Development, San Jose State University, San 
Jose, California, USA.
(2)Department of Applied Psychology, New York University, New York, New York, 
USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut, USA.

Children's early math skills have been hailed as a powerful predictor of 
academic success. Disparities in socioeconomic context, however, also have 
dramatic consequences on children's learning. It is therefore critical to 
investigate both of these distinct contributors in order to better understand 
the early foundations of children's academic outcomes. This study tests an 
integrated model of children's developing math ability so as to (1) identify the 
specific skills and abilities most clearly linked to early math achievement and 
(2) measure the influence of children's socioeconomic context on each of these 
skills. We first evaluated the early vocabulary, number word knowledge (knower 
level), and Approximate Number System (ANS) acuity of a diverse group of 
preschoolers. Then, approximately 1 year later as they entered Kindergarten, we 
administered a test of early math achievement. We find that children's early 
language (general vocabulary and number word knowledge) fully mediates the 
relationship between parent education and math ability. Additionally, number 
word knowledge mediates the relationship between ANS acuity and early math. We 
argue that increased focus on number word knowledge, as well as general 
vocabulary, may help to minimize disparities in math ability as children enter 
kindergarten. We also highlight the role of parent education on children's 
learning and note that this may be an important locus for intervention.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12773
PMID: 30449054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Dev Sci. 2019 Jul;22(4):e12777. doi: 10.1111/desc.12777. Epub 2018 Dec 13.

Children's scale errors are a natural consequence of learning to associate 
objects with actions: A computational model.

Grzyb BJ(1)(2), Nagai Y(3), Asada M(2), Cattani A(1), Floccia C(1), Cangelosi 
A(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)University of Plymouth, Plymouth, UK.
(2)Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(3)National Institute of Information and Communications Technology, Osaka, 
Japan.
(4)School of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

Young children sometimes attempt an action on an object, which is inappropriate 
because of the object size-they make scale errors. Existing theories suggest 
that scale errors may result from immaturities in children's action planning 
system, which might be overpowered by increased complexity of object 
representations or developing teleofunctional bias. We used computational 
modelling to emulate children's learning to associate objects with actions and 
to select appropriate actions, given object shape and size. A computational 
Developmental Deep Model of Action and Naming (DDMAN) was built on the 
dual-route theory of action selection, in which actions on objects are selected 
via a direct (nonsemantic or visual) route or an indirect (semantic) route. As 
in case of children, DDMAN produced scale errors: the number of errors was high 
at the beginning of training and decreased linearly but did not disappear 
completely. Inspection of emerging object-action associations revealed that 
these were coarsely organized by shape, hence leading DDMAN to initially select 
actions based on shape rather than size. With experience, DDMAN gradually 
learned to use size in addition to shape when selecting actions. Overall, our 
simulations demonstrate that children's scale errors are a natural consequence 
of learning to associate objects with actions.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12777
PMID: 30478928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12688. doi: 10.1111/desc.12688. Epub 2018 Jun 7.

The independent and interacting effects of socioeconomic status and 
dual-language use on brain structure and cognition.

Brito NH(1), Noble KG(2); Pediatric Imaging, Neurocognition, Genetics Study.

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Psychology, New York University, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Biobehavioral Sciences, Teachers College, Columbia University, 
New York, USA.

Family socioeconomic status (SES) is strongly associated with children's 
cognitive development, and past studies have reported socioeconomic disparities 
in both neurocognitive skills and brain structure across childhood. In other 
studies, bilingualism has been associated with cognitive advantages and 
differences in brain structure across the lifespan. The aim of the current study 
is to concurrently examine the joint and independent associations between family 
SES and dual-language use with brain structure and cognitive skills during 
childhood. A subset of data from the Pediatric Imaging, Neurocognition and 
Genetics (PING) study was analyzed; propensity score matching established an 
equal sample (N = 562) of monolinguals and dual-language users with similar 
socio-demographic characteristics (Mage = 13.5, Range = 3-20 years). When 
collapsing across all ages, SES was linked to both brain structure and cognitive 
skills. When examining differences by age group, brain structure was 
significantly associated with both income and dual-language use during 
adolescence, but not earlier in childhood. Additionally, in adolescence, a 
significant interaction between dual-language use and SES was found, with no 
difference in cortical surface area (SA) between language groups of higher-SES 
backgrounds but significantly increased SA for dual-language users from 
lower-SES families compared to SES-matched monolinguals. These results suggest 
both independent and interacting associations between SES and dual-language use 
with brain development. To our knowledge, this is the first study to 
concurrently examine dual-language use and socioeconomic differences in brain 
structure during childhood and adolescence.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12688
PMCID: PMC6202148
PMID: 29877603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12585. doi: 10.1111/desc.12585. Epub 2017 Jul 12.

Telling young children they have a reputation for being smart promotes cheating.

Zhao L(1)(2), Heyman GD(3)(4), Chen L(1), Lee K(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institutes of Psychological Sciences, Hangzhou Normal University, PR China.
(2)Zhejiang Key Laboratory for Research in Assessment of Cognitive Impairments, 
PR China.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of California San Diego, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, Zhejiang Normal University, PR China.
(5)Dr Eric Jackman Institute of Child Study, University of Toronto, Canada.

The present research examined the consequences of telling young children they 
have a reputation for being smart. Of interest was how this would affect their 
willingness to resist the temptation to cheat for personal gain as assessed by a 
temptation resistance task, in which children promised not to cheat in the game. 
Two studies with 3- and 5-year-old children (total N = 323) assessed this 
possibility. In Study 1, participants were assigned to one of three conditions: 
a smart reputation condition in which they were told they have a reputation for 
being smart, an irrelevant reputation control condition, or a no reputation 
control condition. Children in the smart reputation condition were significantly 
more likely to cheat than their counterparts in either control condition. Study 
2 confirmed that reputational concerns are indeed a fundamental part of our 
smart reputation effect. These results suggest that children as young as 3 years 
of age are able to use reputational cues to guide their behavior, and that 
telling young children they have a positive reputation for being smart can have 
negative consequences.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12585
PMID: 28703471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Dev Sci. 2019 Jul;22(4):e12779. doi: 10.1111/desc.12779. Epub 2018 Dec 27.

Infant gaze following depends on communicative signals: An eye-tracking study of 
5- to 7-month-olds in Vanuatu.

Hernik M(1), Broesch T(2).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Development Center, Central European University, Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada.

Gaze is considered a crucial component of early communication between an infant 
and her caregiver. When communicatively addressed, infants respond aptly to 
others' gaze by following its direction. However, experience with face-to-face 
contact varies across cultures, begging the question whether infants' 
competencies in receiving others' communicative gaze signals are universal or 
culturally specific . We used eye-tracking to assess gaze-following responses of 
5- to 7-month olds in Vanuatu, where face-to-face parent-infant interactions are 
less prevalent than in Western populations. We found that-just like Western 
6-month-olds studied previously-5- to -7-month-olds living in Vanuatu followed 
gaze only, when communicatively addressed. That is, if presented gaze shifts 
were preceded by infant-directed speech, but not if they were preceded by 
adult-directed speech. These results are consistent with the notion that early 
infant gaze following is tied to infants' early emerging communicative 
competencies and rooted in universal mechanisms rather than being dependent on 
cultural specificities of early socialization.

© 2018 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12779
PMCID: PMC6618848
PMID: 30506550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare no conflicts of interest.


359. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12745. doi: 10.1111/desc.12745. Epub 2018 Oct 2.

Learning to read in Chinese: Evidence for reciprocal relationships between word 
reading and oral language skills.

Hulme C(1), Zhou L(2), Tong X(3), Lervåg A(4), Burgoyne K(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Education, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)Psychology and Language Sciences, University College London, London, UK.
(3)Faculty of Education, Hong Kong University, Hong Kong.
(4)Department of Education, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Human Communication, Development and Hearing, , University of Manchester, 
Manchester, UK.

This study investigates the longitudinal predictors of the development of 
Chinese word reading skills and potential bidirectional relationships between 
Chinese word reading and oral language skills. We examine, in a 2-year 
longitudinal study, a wide range of theoretically important predictors 
(phonological awareness, tone awareness, morphological awareness, visual skills, 
rapid automatized naming, Pinyin knowledge, and vocabulary knowledge) of reading 
in 143 primary-school children living in mainland China. Initial levels of 
reading were predicted by vocabulary knowledge, phonological awareness, and 
visual discrimination skills. Only initial reading levels predicted growth in 
reading. Initial reading also predicted growth in vocabulary knowledge and 
morphological construction. This pattern demonstrates that the early stages of 
learning to read in Chinese places demands on semantic (vocabulary) and visual 
skills in addition to phonological skills. Furthermore, early levels of word 
reading predict the growth of vocabulary knowledge and morphological awareness 
suggesting that the development of these oral language skills is facilitated by 
learning to read.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12745
PMID: 30159970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12646. doi: 10.1111/desc.12646. Epub 2018 Jan 22.

Effects of school-based mindfulness training on emotion processing and 
well-being in adolescents: evidence from event-related potentials.

Sanger KL(1)(2), Thierry G(2), Dorjee D(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Mindfulness Research and Practice, Bangor University, Bangor, 
Gwynedd, UK.
(2)School of Psychology, Bangor University, Bangor, Gwynedd, UK.

In a non-randomized controlled study, we investigated the efficacy of a 
school-based mindfulness curriculum delivered by schoolteachers to older 
secondary school students (16-18 years). We measured changes in emotion 
processing indexed by P3b event-related potential (ERP) modulations in an 
affective oddball task using static human faces. ERPs were recorded to happy and 
sad face oddballs presented in a stimulus stream of frequent faces with neutral 
expression, before and after 8 weeks of mindfulness training. Whilst the mean 
amplitude of the P3b, an ERP component typically elicited by infrequent 
oddballs, decreased between testing sessions in the control group, it remained 
unchanged in the training group. Significant increases in self-reported 
well-being and fewer doctor visits for mental health support were also reported 
in the training group as compared to controls. The observed habituation to 
emotional stimuli in controls thus contrasted with maintained sensitivity in 
mindfulness-trained students. These results suggest that in-school mindfulness 
training for adolescents has scope for increasing awareness of socially relevant 
emotional stimuli, irrespective of valence, and thus may decrease vulnerability 
to depression.

© 2018 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12646
PMCID: PMC6175003
PMID: 29356254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Dev Sci. 2019 Mar;22(2):e12744. doi: 10.1111/desc.12744. Epub 2018 Sep 27.

Laterality of the frontal aslant tract (FAT) explains externalizing behaviors 
through its association with executive function.

Garic D(1), Broce I(2), Graziano P(1), Mattfeld A(1), Dick AS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Florida International University, Miami, Florida.
(2)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, California.

We investigated the development of a recently identified white matter pathway, 
the frontal aslant tract (FAT) and its association with executive function and 
externalizing behaviors in a sample of 129 neurotypical male and female human 
children ranging in age from 7 months to 19 years. We found that the FAT could 
be tracked in 92% of those children, and that the pathway showed age-related 
differences into adulthood. The change in white matter microstructure was very 
rapid until about 6 years, and then plateaued, only to show age-related 
increases again after the age of 11 years. In a subset of those children (5-18 
years; n = 70), left laterality of the microstructural properties of the FAT was 
associated with greater attention problems as measured by the Child Behavior 
Checklist (CBCL). However, this relationship was fully mediated by higher 
executive dysfunction as measured by the Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive 
Function (BRIEF). This relationship was specific to the FAT-we found no 
relationship between laterality of a control pathway, or of the white matter of 
the brain in general, and attention and executive function. These findings 
suggest that the degree to which the developing brain favors a right lateralized 
structural dominance of the FAT is directly associated with executive function 
and attention. This novel finding provides a new potential structural biomarker 
to assess attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and associated 
executive dysfunction during development.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12744
PMID: 30159951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12693. doi: 10.1111/desc.12693. Epub 2018 Jun 19.

Prospective organization of neonatal arm movements: A motor foundation of 
embodied agency, disrupted in premature birth.

Delafield-Butt JT(1)(2), Freer Y(3), Perkins J(1), Skulina D(1)(4), Schögler 
B(1), Lee DN(1).

Author information:
(1)Perception Movement Action Research Consortium, The University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh, UK.
(2)Laboratory for Innovation in Autism, Faculty of Humanities and Social 
Sciences, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK.
(3)Simpson Centre for Reproductive Health, The Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh, UK.
(4)School of Physics, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

Prospective motor control moves the body into the future, from where one is to 
where one wants to be. It is a hallmark of intentionality. But its origin in 
development is uncertain. In this study, we tested whether or not the arm 
movements of newborn infants were prospectively controlled. We measured the 
spatiotemporal organization of 480 full-term neonatal arm movements and 384 arm 
movements of prematurely born infants at-risk for neurodevelopmental disorder. 
We found 75% of healthy term-birth neonatal movements and 68% of prematurely 
born infant movements conformed to the τG -coupling model of prospective 
sensorimotor control. Prospective coupling values were significantly reduced in 
the latter (p = .010, r = .087). In both cases prospectively controlled 
movements were tightly organized by fixed-duration units with a base duration of 
218 ms and additional temporal units of 145 ms. Yet distances remained constant. 
Thus, we demonstrate for the first time a precise prospective spatiotemporal 
organization of neonatal arm movements and demonstrate that at-risk infants 
exhibit reduced sensorimotor control. Prospective motor control is a hallmark of 
primary sensorimotor intentionality and gives a strong embodied foundation to 
conscious motor agency.

© 2018 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12693
PMCID: PMC6220947
PMID: 29920860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2):10.1111/desc.12521. doi: 10.1111/desc.12521. Epub 2017 
Mar 2.

Auditory-motor adaptation is reduced in adults who stutter but not in children 
who stutter.

Daliri A(1)(2), Wieland EA(3), Cai S(4), Guenther FH(1), Chang SE(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, Boston University, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Speech and Hearing Science, Arizona State University, Tempe, 
AZ, USA.
(3)Department of Communicative Sciences & Disorders, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI, USA.
(4)Google, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Previous studies have shown that adults who stutter produce smaller corrective 
motor responses to compensate for unexpected auditory perturbations in 
comparison to adults who do not stutter, suggesting that stuttering may be 
associated with deficits in integration of auditory feedback for online speech 
monitoring. In this study, we examined whether stuttering is also associated 
with deficiencies in integrating and using discrepancies between expected and 
received auditory feedback to adaptively update motor programs for accurate 
speech production. Using a sensorimotor adaptation paradigm, we measured 
adaptive speech responses to auditory formant frequency perturbations in adults 
and children who stutter and their matched nonstuttering controls. We found that 
the magnitude of the speech adaptive response for children who stutter did not 
differ from that of fluent children. However, the adaptation magnitude of adults 
who stutter in response to auditory perturbation was significantly smaller than 
the adaptation magnitude of adults who do not stutter. Together these results 
indicate that stuttering is associated with deficits in integrating 
discrepancies between predicted and received auditory feedback to calibrate the 
speech production system in adults but not children. This auditory-motor 
integration deficit thus appears to be a compensatory effect that develops over 
years of stuttering.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12521
PMCID: PMC5581739
PMID: 28256029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12669. doi: 10.1111/desc.12669. Epub 2018 Apr 16.

Extremely preterm children exhibit increased interhemispheric connectivity for 
language: findings from fMRI-constrained MEG analysis.

Barnes-Davis ME(1)(2), Merhar SL(1)(2), Holland SK(2)(3)(4), Kadis DS(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Perinatal Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(3)Pediatric Neuroimaging Research Consortium, Cincinnati Children's Hospital 
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology and Medical Imaging, Cincinnati Children's Hospital 
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(5)Division of Neurology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Children born extremely preterm are at significant risk for cognitive 
impairment, including language deficits. The relationship between preterm birth 
and neurological changes that underlie cognitive deficits is poorly understood. 
We use a stories-listening task in fMRI and MEG to characterize language network 
representation and connectivity in children born extremely preterm (n = 15, <28 
weeks gestation, ages 4-6 years), and in a group of typically developing control 
participants (n = 15, term birth, 4-6 years). Participants completed a brief 
neuropsychological assessment. Conventional fMRI analyses revealed no 
significant differences in language network representation across groups (p > 
.05, corrected). The whole-group fMRI activation map was parcellated to define 
the language network as a set of discrete nodes, and the timecourse of neuronal 
activity at each position was estimated using linearly constrained minimum 
variance beamformer in MEG. Virtual timecourses were subjected to connectivity 
and network-based analyses. We observed significantly increased beta-band 
functional connectivity in extremely preterm compared to controls (p < .05). 
Specifically, we observed an increase in connectivity between left and right 
perisylvian cortex. Subsequent effective connectivity analyses revealed that 
hyperconnectivity in preterms was due to significantly increased information 
flux originating from the right hemisphere (p < 0.05). The total strength and 
density of the language network were not related to language or nonverbal 
performance, suggesting that the observed hyperconnectivity is a "pure" effect 
of prematurity. Although our extremely preterm children exhibited typical 
language network architecture, we observed significantly altered network 
dynamics, indicating reliance on an alternative neural strategy for the language 
task.

© 2018 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12669
PMCID: PMC6193851
PMID: 29659125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12606. doi: 10.1111/desc.12606. Epub 2017 Sep 15.

Do transgender children (gender) stereotype less than their peers and siblings?

Olson KR(1), Enright EA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.

In the present work, we ask whether socially transitioned, transgender children 
differ from other children in their endorsement of gender stereotypes and 
response to others' gender nonconformity. We compare transgender children (N = 
56) to a group of siblings of transgender children (N = 37), and a group of 
unrelated control participants (N = 56) during middle childhood (ages 6-8 years 
old). Our results indicate that transgender children and the siblings of 
transgender children endorse gender stereotypes less than the control group. 
Further, transgender children see violations of gender stereotypes as more 
acceptable, and they are more willing to indicate a desire to befriend and 
attend school with someone who violates gender stereotypes than the control 
participants. These results held after statistically controlling for demographic 
differences between families with and without transgender children. We discuss 
several possible reasons that can explain these differences.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12606
PMID: 28913950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12677. doi: 10.1111/desc.12677. Epub 2018 May 15.

Attention to speech and spoken language development in deaf children with 
cochlear implants: a 10-year longitudinal study.

Wang Y(1), Shafto CL(2), Houston DM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(2)Galen College of Nursing, Louisville, Kentucky, USA.

Early auditory/language experience plays an important role in language 
development. In this study, we examined the effects of severe-to-profound 
hearing loss and subsequent cochlear implantation on the development of 
attention to speech in children with cochlear implants (CIs). In addition, we 
investigated the extent to which attention to speech may predict spoken language 
development in children with CIs. We tested children with CIs and compared them 
to chronologically age-matched peers with normal hearing (NH) on their attention 
to speech at four time points post implantation; specifically, less than 1 
month, 3 to 6 months, 12 months, and 18 months post implantation. We also 
collected a variety of well-established speech perception and spoken language 
measures from the children with CIs in a 10-year longitudinal study. Children 
with CIs showed reduced attention to speech as compared to their peers with NH 
at less than 1 month post implantation, but a similar degree of attention to 
speech as their NH peers during later time points. In addition, attention to 
speech at 3 to 6 months post implantation predicts speech perception in children 
with CIs. These results inform language acquisition theories and bring insights 
into our understanding of early severe-to-profound hearing loss on infants' 
attention to speech skills. In addition, the findings have significant clinical 
implications for early intervention on hearing loss, which emphasizes the 
importance of developing strong listening skills. A video abstract of this 
article can be viewed at: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f7xiYo3Ua08&feature=youtu.be.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12677
PMCID: PMC6202126
PMID: 29761835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12642. doi: 10.1111/desc.12642. Epub 2017 Dec 26.

Learning by observation and learning by doing in Down and Williams syndromes.

Foti F(1)(2)(3), Menghini D(4), Alfieri P(4), Costanzo F(4), Mandolesi L(3)(5), 
Petrosini L(2)(3), Vicari S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Magna Graecia University of 
Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy.
(2)Department of Psychology, "Sapienza" University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(3)IRCCS Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy.
(4)Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, Neuroscience Department, Children's Hospital 
Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Motor Science and Wellness, University Parthenope, Naples, 
Italy.

New skills may be learned by active experience (experiential learning or 
learning by doing) or by observation of others' experience (learning by 
observation). In general, learning by observation reduces the time and the 
attempts needed to learn complex actions and behaviors. The present research 
aimed to compare learning by observation and learning by doing in two clinical 
populations with different etiology of intellectual disability (ID), as 
individuals with Down syndrome (DS) and individuals with Williams syndrome (WS), 
with the hypothesis that specific profiles of learning may be found in each 
syndrome. To this end, we used a mixture of new and existing data to compare the 
performances of 24 individuals with DS, 24 individuals with WS and 24 typically 
developing children on computerized tasks of learning by observation or learning 
by doing. The main result was that the two groups with ID exhibited distinct 
patterns of learning by observation. Thus, individuals with DS were impaired in 
reproducing the previously observed visuo-motor sequence, while they were as 
efficient as TD children in the experiential learning task. On the other hand, 
individuals with WS benefited from the observational training while they were 
severely impaired in detecting the visuo-motor sequence in the experiential 
learning task (when presented first). The present findings reinforce the 
syndrome-specific hypothesis and the view of ID as a variety of conditions in 
which some cognitive functions are more disrupted than others because of the 
differences in genetic profile and brain morphology and functionality. These 
findings have important implications for clinicians, who should take into 
account the genetic etiology of ID in developing learning programs for treatment 
and education.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12642
PMID: 29280247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Dev Sci. 2020 Nov 18:e13064. doi: 10.1111/desc.13064. Online ahead of print.

Sampling to learn words: Adults and children sample words that reduce 
referential ambiguity.

Zettersten M(1), Saffran JR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1202 W Johnson 
Street, Madison, WI, 53706, U.S.A.

How do learners gather new information during word learning? One possibility is 
that learners selectively sample items that help them reduce uncertainty about 
new word meanings. In a series of cross-situational word learning tasks with 
adults and children, we manipulated the referential ambiguity of label-object 
pairs experienced during training and subsequently investigated which words 
participants chose to sample additional information about. In the first 
experiment, adult learners chose to receive additional training on object-label 
associations that reduce referential ambiguity during cross-situational word 
learning. This ambiguity-reduction strategy was related to improved test 
performance. In two subsequent experiments, we found that, at least in some 
contexts, children (3-8 years of age) show a similar preference to seek 
information about words experienced in ambiguous word learning situations. In 
Experiment 2, children did not preferentially select object-label associations 
that remained ambiguous during cross-situational word learning. However, in a 
third experiment that increased the relative ambiguity of two sets of novel 
object-label associations, we found evidence that children preferentially make 
selections that reduce ambiguity about novel word meanings. These results carry 
implications for understanding how children actively contribute to their own 
language development by seeking information that supports learning.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13064
PMID: 33206454


369. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12689. doi: 10.1111/desc.12689. Epub 2018 Jun 19.

Mothers' and fathers' mind-mindedness influences physiological emotion 
regulation of infants across the first year of life.

Zeegers MAJ(1), de Vente W(1), Nikolić M(1), Majdandžić M(1), Bögels SM(1), 
Colonnesi C(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Institute of Child Development and Education, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The main aim of this study was to test whether mothers' (n = 116) and fathers' 
(n = 116) mind-mindedness predicts infants' physiological emotion regulation 
(heart rate variability; HRV) across the first year of life. Three hypotheses 
were examined: (a) parents' mind-mindedness at 4 and 12 months predicts infants' 
HRV at 12 months over and above infants' initial HRV levels at 4 months, (b) 
mothers' and fathers' mind-mindedness independently predict infant HRV, and (c) 
the effects of mind-mindedness on infant HRV (partially) operate via parenting 
behaviour. Infants' HRV was assessed during rest and a stranger approach. 
Mind-mindedness was assessed by calculating the proportions of appropriate and 
non-attuned mind-related comments during free-play interactions, and parenting 
quality was observed at 4 and 12 months in the same interactions. Path analyses 
showed that mothers' appropriate mind-related comments at 4 and 12 months 
predicted higher baseline HRV at 12 months, whereas mothers' non-attuned 
comments predicted lower baseline HRV at 12 months. Similar, but concurrent, 
relations were found for fathers' appropriate and non-attuned mind-related 
comments and infant baseline HRV at 12 months. In addition, fathers' appropriate 
mind-related comments showed an indirect association with infant baseline HRV at 
12 months via fathers' parenting quality. With regard to infant HRV reactivity 
during the stranger approach, mothers' appropriate mind-related comments at 4 
months and fathers' non-attuned mind-related comments at 12 months predicted a 
larger HRV decline during the stranger approach at 12 months. Infants' HRV at 4 
months did not predict parents' later mind-mindedness. The results indicate that 
mothers' and fathers' appropriate and non-attuned mind-related speech uniquely 
impacts the development of infants' physiological emotion regulation.

© 2018 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12689
PMCID: PMC6220880
PMID: 29920863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12598. doi: 10.1111/desc.12598. Epub 2017 Aug 15.

The development and flexibility of gaze alternations in bonobos and chimpanzees.

Lucca K(1), MacLean EL(2), Hare B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology & Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)School of Anthropology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA.

Infants' early gaze alternations are one of their first steps towards a 
sophisticated understanding of the social world. This ability, to gaze alternate 
between an object of interest and another individual also attending to that 
object, has been considered foundational to the development of many complex 
social-cognitive abilities, such as theory of mind and language. However, to 
understand the evolution of these abilities, it is important to identify whether 
and how gaze alternations are used and develop in our closest living relatives, 
bonobos (Pan paniscus) and chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). Here, we evaluated the 
development of gaze alternations in a large, developmental sample of bonobos (N 
= 17) and chimpanzees (N = 35). To assess the flexibility of ape gaze 
alternations, we tested whether they produced gaze alternations when requesting 
food from a human who was either visually attentive or visually inattentive. 
Similarly to human infants, both bonobos and chimpanzees produced gaze 
alternations, and did so more frequently when a human communicative partner was 
visually attentive. However, unlike humans, who gaze alternate frequently from 
early in development, chimpanzees did not begin to gaze alternate frequently 
until adulthood. Bonobos produced very few gaze alternations, regardless of age. 
Thus, it may be the early emergence of gaze alternations, as opposed gaze 
alternations themselves, that is derived in the human lineage. The distinctively 
early emergence of gaze alternations in humans may be a critical underpinning 
for the development of complex human social-cognitive abilities.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12598
PMID: 28812318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12665. doi: 10.1111/desc.12665. Epub 2018 Apr 6.

Prosocial and self-interested intra-twin pair behavior in monozygotic and 
dizygotic twins in the early to middle childhood transition.

Yirmiya K(1), Segal NL(2), Bloch G(3)(4), Knafo-Noam A(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 
Israel.
(2)Department of Psychology, California State University, Fullerton, California, 
USA.
(3)Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Behavior, The Hebrew University of 
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
(4)The Ferdermann Center for the Study of Rationality, The Hebrew University of 
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.

Several related and complementary theoretical frameworks have been proposed to 
explain the existence of prosocial behavior, despite its potential fitness cost 
to the individual. These include kin selection theory, proposing that organisms 
have a propensity to help those to whom they are genetically related, and 
reciprocity, referring to the benefit of being prosocial, depending on past and 
future mutual interactions. A useful paradigm to examine prosociality is to 
compare mean levels of this behavior between monozygotic (MZ) and dizygotic (DZ) 
twins. Here, we examined the performance of 883 6.5-year-old twins (139 MZ and 
302 DZ same-sex 6.5-year-old full twin pairs) in the Differential Productivity 
Task. In this task, the twins' behaviors were observed under two conditions: 
working for themselves vs. working for their co-twin. There were no significant 
differences between the performances of MZ and DZ twins in the prosocial 
condition of the task. Correlations within the twin dyads were significantly 
higher in MZ than DZ twins in the self-interested condition. However, similar MZ 
and DZ correlations were found in the prosocial condition, supporting the role 
of reciprocity in twins' prosociality towards each other.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12665
PMID: 29624797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12593. doi: 10.1111/desc.12593. Epub 2017 Sep 12.

The developmental trajectory of children's auditory and visual statistical 
learning abilities: modality-based differences in the effect of age.

Raviv L(1)(2), Arnon I(3).

Author information:
(1)Psychology of Language Department, Max Planck Institute for 
Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Cognitive Science, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel.
(3)Department of Psychology, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel.

Infants, children and adults are capable of extracting recurring patterns from 
their environment through statistical learning (SL), an implicit learning 
mechanism that is considered to have an important role in language acquisition. 
Research over the past 20 years has shown that SL is present from very early 
infancy and found in a variety of tasks and across modalities (e.g., auditory, 
visual), raising questions on the domain generality of SL. However, while SL is 
well established for infants and adults, only little is known about its 
developmental trajectory during childhood, leaving two important questions 
unanswered: (1) Is SL an early-maturing capacity that is fully developed in 
infancy, or does it improve with age like other cognitive capacities (e.g., 
memory)? and (2) Will SL have similar developmental trajectories across 
modalities? Only few studies have looked at SL across development, with 
conflicting results: some find age-related improvements while others do not. 
Importantly, no study to date has examined auditory SL across childhood, nor 
compared it to visual SL to see if there are modality-based differences in the 
developmental trajectory of SL abilities. We addressed these issues by 
conducting a large-scale study of children's performance on matching auditory 
and visual SL tasks across a wide age range (5-12y). Results show modality-based 
differences in the development of SL abilities: while children's learning in the 
visual domain improved with age, learning in the auditory domain did not change 
in the tested age range. We examine these findings in light of previous studies 
and discuss their implications for modality-based differences in SL and for the 
role of auditory SL in language acquisition. A video abstract of this article 
can be viewed at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3kg35hoF0pw.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12593
PMID: 28901038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12653. doi: 10.1111/desc.12653. Epub 2018 Feb 7.

About why there is a shift from cardinal to ordinal processing in the 
association with arithmetic between first and second grade.

Sasanguie D(1)(2), Vos H(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Unit Brain & Cognition, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, Kulak, Kortrijk, Belgium.

Digit comparison is strongly related to individual differences in children's 
arithmetic ability. Why this is the case, however, remains unclear to date. 
Therefore, we investigated the relative contribution of three possible cognitive 
mechanisms in first and second graders' digit comparison performance: digit 
identification, digit-number word matching and digit ordering ability. 
Furthermore, we examined whether these components could account for the 
well-established relation between digit comparison performance and arithmetic. 
As expected, all candidate predictors were related to digit comparison in both 
age groups. Moreover, in first graders, digit ordering and in second graders 
both digit identification and digit ordering explained unique variance in digit 
comparison performance. However, when entering these unique predictors of digit 
comparison into a mediation model with digit comparison as predictor and 
arithmetic as outcome, we observed that whereas in second graders digit ordering 
was a full mediator, in first graders this was not the case. For them, the 
reverse was true and digit comparison fully mediated the relation between digit 
ordering and arithmetic. These results suggest that between first and second 
grade, there is a shift in the predictive value for arithmetic from cardinal 
processing and procedural knowledge to ordinal processing and retrieving 
declarative knowledge from memory; a process which is possibly due to a change 
in arithmetic strategies at that age. A video abstract of this article can be 
viewed at: https://youtu.be/dDB0IGi2Hf8.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12653
PMID: 29417697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12635. doi: 10.1111/desc.12635. Epub 2017 Nov 8.

Development of the ability to combine visual and acoustic information in working 
memory.

Cowan N(1), Li Y(1), Glass BA(1), Scott Saults J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Science, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, 
USA.

Presentation of two kinds of materials in working memory (visual and acoustic), 
with the requirement to attend to one or both modalities, poses an interesting 
case for working memory development because competing predictions can be 
formulated. In two experiments, we assessed such predictions with children 7-13 
years old and adults. With development, the ability to hold more information in 
the focus of attention could lead to an increase in the size of the trade-off 
between modalities; if attention can hold A items during unimodal-attention 
trials, then on average attention should hold A/2 of those same items during 
bimodal-attention trials. If A increases with age, so would the dual-task cost, 
A/2. The results clearly ruled out that possibility. It was the modality- or 
code-specific components of working memory that improved with age and not the 
central component. We discuss various mechanisms that could have produced these 
results, including alternative attention-based mechanisms. The findings point to 
a rich field for continued research.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12635
PMCID: PMC5986620
PMID: 29119661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Dev Sci. 2019 Mar;22(2):e12749. doi: 10.1111/desc.12749. Epub 2018 Oct 2.

Interindividual differences in neonatal sociality and emotionality predict 
juvenile social status in rhesus monkeys.

Wooddell LJ(1), Simpson EA(2), Murphy AM(1)(3), Dettmer AM(4), Paukner A(5).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience and Behavior, California National Primate Research Center, 
Davis, California.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of California, Davis, California.
(4)U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, American 
Psychological Association, Washington, District of Columbia.
(5)Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute for Child Health and Human 
Development, National Institutes of Health, Poolesville, Maryland.

In humans, socioeconomic status (SES) has profound outcomes on socio-emotional 
development and health. However, while much is known about the consequences of 
SES, little research has examined the predictors of SES due to the longitudinal 
nature of such studies. We sought to explore whether interindividual differences 
in neonatal sociality, temperament, and early social experiences predicted 
juvenile social status in rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta), as a proxy for SES in 
humans. We performed neonatal imitation tests in infants' first week of life and 
emotional reactivity assessments at 2 and 4 weeks of age. We examined whether 
these traits, as well as the rearing environment in the first 8 months of life 
(with the mother or with same-aged peers only) and maternal social status 
predicted juvenile (2-3 years old) social status following the formation of peer 
social groups at 8 months. We found that infants who exhibited higher rates of 
neonatal imitation and newborn emotional reactivity achieved higher social 
status as juveniles, as did infants who were reared with their mothers, compared 
to infants reared with peers. Maternal social status was only associated with 
juvenile status for infant dyads reared in the same maternal group, indicating 
that relative social relationships were transferred through social experience. 
These results suggest that neonatal imitation and emotional reactivity may 
reflect ingrained predispositions toward sociality that predict later outcomes, 
and that nonnormative social experiences can alter socio-developmental 
trajectories. Our results indicate that neonatal characteristics and early 
social experiences predict later social outcomes in adolescence, including 
gradients of social stratification.

Published 2018. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public 
domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12749
PMID: 30171780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12699. doi: 10.1111/desc.12699. Epub 2018 Aug 16.

Accounting for the shared environment in cognitive abilities and academic 
achievement with measured socioecological contexts.

Engelhardt LE(1), Church JA(1), Paige Harden K(1)(2), Tucker-Drob EM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin, Texas.
(2)Population Research Center, University of Texas at Austin, Texas.

Behavioral and molecular genetic research has established that child cognitive 
ability and academic performance are substantially heritable, but genetic 
variation does not account for all of the stratification of cognitive and 
academic outcomes across families. Which specific contexts and experiences 
contribute to these shared environmental influences on cognitive ability and 
academic achievement? Using an ethnically and socioeconomically diverse sample 
of N = 1728 twins ages 7-20 from the Texas Twin Project, we identified specific 
measured family, school, and neighborhood socioecological contexts that 
statistically accounted for latent shared environmental variance in cognitive 
abilities and academic skills. Composite measures of parent socioeconomic status 
(SES), school demographic composition, and neighborhood SES accounted for 
moderate proportions of variation in IQ and achievement. Total variance 
explained by the multilevel contexts ranged from 15% to 22%. The influence of 
family SES on IQ and achievement overlapped substantially with the influence of 
school and neighborhood predictors. Together with race, the measured 
socioecological contexts explained 100% of shared environmental influences on IQ 
and approximately 79% of shared environmental influences on both verbal 
comprehension and reading ability. In contrast, nontrivial proportions of shared 
environmental variation in math performance were left unexplained. We highlight 
the potential utility of constructing "polyenvironmental risk scores" in an 
effort to better predict developmental outcomes and to quantify children's and 
adolescents' interrelated networks of experiences. A video abstract of this 
article can be viewed at: https://youtu.be/77E_DctFsr0.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12699
PMCID: PMC6294670
PMID: 30113118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.


377. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12735. doi: 10.1111/desc.12735. Epub 2018 Sep 26.

Infant sustained attention but not joint attention to objects at 9 months 
predicts vocabulary at 12 and 15 months.

Yu C(1), Suanda SH(2), Smith LB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Program in Cognitive Science, 
Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana.
(2)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Connecticut, Storrs, 
Connecticut.

Vocabulary differences early in development are highly predictive of later 
language learning as well as achievement in school. Early word learning emerges 
in the context of tightly coupled social interactions between the early learner 
and a mature partner. In the present study, we develop and apply a novel 
paradigm-dual head-mounted eye tracking-to record momentary gaze data from both 
parents and infants during free-flowing toy-play contexts. With fine-grained 
sequential patterns extracted from continuous gaze streams, we objectively 
measure both joint attention and sustained attention as parents and 9-month-old 
infants played with objects and as parents named objects during play. We show 
that both joint attention and infant sustained attention predicted vocabulary 
sizes at 12 and 15 months, but infant sustained attention in the context of 
joint attention, not joint attention itself, is the stronger unique predictor of 
later vocabulary size. Joint attention may predict word learning because joint 
attention supports infant attention to the named object.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12735
PMCID: PMC6918481
PMID: 30255968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12703. doi: 10.1111/desc.12703. Epub 2018 Jul 2.

Development of brain functional connectivity and its relation to infant 
sustained attention in the first year of life.

Xie W(1)(2)(3), Mallin BM(4), Richards JE(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South 
Carolina.
(2)Institute for Mind and Brain, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South 
Carolina.
(3)Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Ultrasound Leadership Academy, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The study of brain functional connectivity is crucial to understanding the 
neural mechanisms underlying the improved behavioral performance and amplified 
ERP responses observed during infant sustained attention. Previous 
investigations on the development of functional brain connectivity during 
infancy are primarily confined to the use of functional and structural MRI 
techniques. The current study examined the relation between infant sustained 
attention and brain functional connectivity and their development during infancy 
with high-density EEG recordings. Fifty-nine infants were tested at 6 (N = 15), 
8 (N =14), 10 (N = 17), and 12 (N = 13) months. Infant sustained attention was 
defined by measuring infant heart rate changes during infants' looking. 
Functional connectivity was estimated from the electrodes on the scalp and with 
reconstructed cortical source activities in brain regions. It was found that 
infant sustained attention was accompanied by attenuated functional connectivity 
in the dorsal attention and default mode networks in the alpha band. Graph 
theory analyses showed that there was an increase in path length and a decrease 
in clustering coefficient during infant sustained attention. The functional 
connectivity within the visual, somatosensory, dorsal attention, and ventral 
attention networks and graph theory measures of path length and clustering 
coefficient were found to increase with age. These findings suggest that infant 
sustained attention is accompanied by distinct patterns of brain functional 
connectivity. The current findings also suggest the rapid development of 
functional connectivity in brain networks during infancy.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12703
PMID: 29968370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12590. doi: 10.1111/desc.12590. Epub 2017 Aug 2.

Do storybooks with anthropomorphized animal characters promote prosocial 
behaviors in young children?

Larsen NE(1), Lee K(1), Ganea PA(1).

Author information:
(1)Eric Jackman Institute of Child Study, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Canada.

For millennia, adults have told children stories not only to entertain but also 
to impart important moral lessons to promote prosocial behaviors. Many such 
stories contain anthropomorphized animals because it is believed that children 
learn from anthropomorphic stories as effectively, if not better than, from 
stories with human characters, and thus are more inclined to act according to 
the moral lessons of the stories. Here we experimentally tested this belief by 
reading preschoolers a sharing story with either human characters or 
anthropomorphized animal characters. Reading the human story significantly 
increased preschoolers' altruistic giving but reading the anthropomorphic story 
or a control story decreased it. Thus, contrary to the common belief, realistic 
stories, not anthropomorphic ones, are better for promoting young children's 
prosocial behavior.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12590
PMID: 28766863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):1087-1094. doi: 10.1111/desc.12382. Epub 2015 Dec 21.

Colour and emotion: children also associate red with negative valence.

Gil S(1)(2), Le Bigot L(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Université de Poitiers, France. sandrine.gil@univ-poitiers.fr.
(2)CNRS (CeRCA UMR7295), France. sandrine.gil@univ-poitiers.fr.
(3)Université de Poitiers, France.
(4)CNRS (CeRCA UMR7295), France.

The association of colour with emotion constitutes a growing field of research, 
as it can affect how humans process their environment. Although there has been 
increasing interest in the association of red with negative valence in adults, 
little is known about how it develops. We therefore tested the red-negative 
association in children for the first time. Children aged 5-10 years performed a 
face categorization task in the form of a card-sorting task. They had to judge 
whether ambiguous faces shown against three different colour backgrounds (red, 
grey, green) seemed to 'feel good' or 'feel bad'. Results of logistic mixed 
models showed that - as previously demonstrated in adults - children across the 
age range provided significantly more 'feel bad' responses when the faces were 
given a red background. This finding is discussed in relation to colour-emotion 
association theories.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12382
PMID: 26690306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2):e12552. doi: 10.1111/desc.12552. Epub 2017 Mar 2.

The procedural learning deficit hypothesis of language learning disorders: we 
see some problems.

West G(1), Vadillo MA(2), Shanks DR(3), Hulme C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Language and Cognition, University College London, UK.
(2)Department of Primary Care and Public Health Sciences, King's College London, 
UK.
(3)Department of Experimental Psychology, University College London, UK.

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2019 Jul;22(4):e12814.
    Dev Sci. 2019 Jul;22(4):e12813.
    Dev Sci. 2019 Jul;22(4):e12815.

Impaired procedural learning has been suggested as a possible cause of 
developmental dyslexia (DD) and specific language impairment (SLI). This study 
examined the relationship between measures of verbal and non-verbal implicit and 
explicit learning and measures of language, literacy and arithmetic attainment 
in a large sample of 7 to 8-year-old children. Measures of verbal explicit 
learning were correlated with measures of attainment. In contrast, no 
relationships between measures of implicit learning and attainment were found. 
Critically, the reliability of the implicit learning tasks was poor. Our results 
show that measures of procedural learning, as currently used, are typically 
unreliable and insensitive to individual differences. A video abstract of this 
article can be viewed at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YnvV-BvNWSo.

2017 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12552
PMCID: PMC5888158
PMID: 28256101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Dev Sci. 2019 May;22(3):e12765. doi: 10.1111/desc.12765. Epub 2018 Nov 14.

Getting less than their fair share: Maltreated youth are hyper-cooperative yet 
vulnerable to exploitation in a public goods game.

Keil J(1)(2), Perren S(3)(4), Schlesier-Michel A(1)(5), Sticca F(6), Sierau 
S(1)(7), Klein AM(1), Steinbeis N(8)(9), von Klitzing K(1), White LO(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and 
Psychosomatics, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Department of Social Monitoring and Methodology, German Youth Institute, 
Munich, Germany.
(3)Department of Empirical Educational Research, University of Konstanz, 
Konstanz, Germany.
(4)Thurgau University of Teacher Education, Kreuzlingen, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Developmental Psychology, Friedrich-Schiller-University of 
Jena, Jena, Germany.
(6)Institute of Education, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(7)Department for Medical Psychology and Medical Sociology, University of 
Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(8)Department of Developmental Psychology, Leiden University, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(9)Department of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology, University College 
London, London, UK.

Human cooperative behavior has long been thought to decline under adversity. 
However, studies have primarily examined perceived patterns of cooperation, with 
little eye to actual cooperative behavior embedded within social interaction. 
Game-theoretical paradigms can help close this gap by unpacking subtle 
differences in how cooperation unfolds during initial encounters. This study is 
the first to use a child-appropriate, virtual, public goods game to study actual 
cooperative behavior in 329 participants aged 9-16 years with histories of 
maltreatment (n = 99) and no maltreatment (n = 230) while controlling for 
psychiatric symptoms. Unlike work on perceived patterns of cooperation, we found 
that maltreated participants actually contribute more resources to a public good 
during peer interaction than their nonmaltreated counterparts. This effect was 
robust when controlling for psychiatric symptoms and peer problems as well as 
demographic variables. We conclude that maltreatment may engender a 
hyper-cooperative strategy to minimize the odds of hostility and preserve 
positive interaction during initial encounters. This, however, comes at the cost 
of potential exploitation by others.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12765
PMID: 30329197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12725. doi: 10.1111/desc.12725. Epub 2018 Aug 29.

An intervention that increases parental sensitivity in families referred to 
Child Protective Services also changes toddlers' parasympathetic regulation.

Hastings PD(1), Kahle S(2), Fleming C(3), Lohr MJ(4), Katz LF(5), Oxford ML(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Mind & Brain, Department of Psychology, University of California 
Davis, Davis, California.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, School of Medicine, 
University of California Davis, Davis, California.
(3)Center for the Study of Health and Risk Behavior, Department of Psychiatry 
and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(4)Department of Family and Child Nursing, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.

Experiencing maltreatment in early childhood predicts poor parasympathetic 
regulation, characterized by low baseline parasympathetic activity and strong 
withdrawal of parasympathetic influence in response to tasks. The Promoting 
First Relationships® (PFR) program improves parental sensitivity toward young 
children in families identified as maltreating. Using a subsample from a 
randomized control trial, we examined whether parental participation in PFR had 
lasting effects on toddlers' parasympathetic regulation, as measured by 
respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA), relative to a resource and referral control 
condition. In addition, we examined whether parental sensitive and responsive 
behavior mediated or moderated associations between parent treatment group and 
children's RSA. More than 6 months after completing treatment, 29 families in 
the PFR condition and 30 families in the control condition were visited at home, 
and toddlers' RSA was assessed at baseline and during five moderately 
challenging tasks. Groups did not differ in baseline RSA, but differed in RSA 
reactivity to the tasks. Across tasks, toddlers of parents in the control 
condition manifested significantly larger RSA decreases than toddlers of parents 
in the PFR condition. Parental behavior showed divergent associations with RSA 
change for toddlers of parents in the PFR versus control condition, with PFR 
treatment predicting RSA change ranging from small decreases to increases in 
toddlers of parents who showed the most sensitive, responsive behavior in the 6 
months following treatment. This preliminary study showed that the same 
intervention that improved parenting also improved toddlers' parasympathetic 
regulation in response to everyday activities, warranting further experimental 
investigation.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12725
PMCID: PMC6294712
PMID: 30156354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12525. Epub 2017 Mar 2.

Tracking independence and merging of prosodic and phonemic processing across 
infancy.

Becker A(1), Schild U(2), Friedrich CK(2).

Author information:
(1)Biological Psychology and Neuropsychology, University of Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Developmental Psychology, University of Tübingen, Germany.

Recent evidence suggests division of labor in phonological analysis underlying 
speech recognition. Adults and children appear to decompose the speech stream 
into phoneme-relevant information and into syllable stress. Here we investigate 
whether both speech processing streams develop from a common path in infancy, or 
whether there are two separate streams from early on. We presented stressed and 
unstressed syllables (spoken primes) followed by initially stressed early 
learned disyllabic German words (spoken targets). Stress overlap and phoneme 
overlap between the primes and the initial syllable of the targets varied 
orthogonally. We tested infants 3, 6 and 9 months after birth. Event-related 
potentials (ERPs) revealed stress priming without phoneme priming in the 
3-month-olds; phoneme priming without stress priming in the 6-month-olds; and 
phoneme priming, stress priming as well as an interaction of both in 
9-month-olds. In general the present findings reveal that infants start with 
separate processing streams related to syllable stress and to phoneme-relevant 
information; and that they need to learn to merge both aspects of speech 
processing. In particular the present results suggest (i) that phoneme-free 
prosodic processing dominates in early infancy; (ii) that prosody-free phoneme 
processing dominates in middle infancy; and (iii) that both types of processing 
are operating in parallel and can be merged in late infancy.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12525
PMID: 28256035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2):10.1111/desc.12545. doi: 10.1111/desc.12545. Epub 2017 
Mar 3.

Neuroanatomical correlates of performance in a state-wide test of math 
achievement.

Wilkey ED(1)(2), Cutting LE(1)(2), Price GR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Peabody College of Education and Human Development, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, TN, USA.
(2)Vanderbilt Brain Institute, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.

The development of math skills is a critical component of early education and a 
strong indicator of later school and economic success. Recent research utilizing 
population-normed, standardized measures of math achievement suggest that 
structural and functional integrity of parietal regions, especially the 
intraparietal sulcus, are closely related to the development of math skills. 
However, it is unknown how these findings relate to in-school math learning. The 
present study is the first to address this issue by investigating the 
relationship between regional differences in grey matter (GM) volume and 
performance in grade-level mathematics as measured by a state-wide, school-based 
test of math achievement (TCAP math) in children from 3rd to 8th grade. Results 
show that increased GM volume in the bilateral hippocampal formation and the 
right inferior frontal gyrus, regions associated with learning and memory, is 
associated with higher TCAP math scores. Secondary analyses revealed that GM 
volume in the left angular gyrus had a stronger relationship to TCAP math in 
grades 3-4 than in grades 5-8 while the relationship between GM volume in the 
left inferior frontal gyrus and TCAP math was stronger for grades 5-8. These 
results suggest that the neuroanatomical architecture related to in-school math 
achievement differs from that related to math achievement measured by 
standardized tests, and that the most related neural structures differ as a 
function of grade level. We suggest, therefore, that the use of school-relevant 
outcome measures is critical if neuroscience is to bridge the gap to education.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12545
PMCID: PMC5901957
PMID: 28256036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12584. doi: 10.1111/desc.12584. Epub 2017 Aug 15.

The development of perceptual averaging: learning what to do, not just how to do 
it.

Jones PR(1)(2), Dekker TM(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London (UCL), UK.
(2)NIHR Moorfields Biomedical Research Centre, London, UK.
(3)Psychology and Language Sciences, University College London (UCL), UK.

The mature visual system condenses complex scenes into simple summary statistics 
(e.g., average size, location, orientation, etc.). However, children, often 
perform poorly on perceptual averaging tasks. Children's difficulties are 
typically thought to represent the suboptimal implementation of an adult-like 
strategy. This paper examines another possibility: that children actually make 
decisions in a qualitatively different way to adults (optimal implementation of 
a non-ideal strategy). Ninety children (6-7, 8-9, 10-11 years) and 30 adults 
were asked to locate the middle of randomly generated dot-clouds. Nine plausible 
decision strategies were formulated, and each was fitted to observers' 
trial-by-trial response data (Reverse Correlation). When the number of visual 
elements was low (N < 6), children used a qualitatively different decision 
strategy from adults: appearing to "join up the dots" and locate the 
gravitational center of the enclosing shape. Given denser displays, both 
children and adults used an ideal strategy of arithmetically averaging 
individual points. Accounting for this difference in decision strategy explained 
29% of children's lower precision. These findings suggest that children are not 
simply suboptimal at performing adult-like computations, but may at times use 
sensible, but qualitatively different strategies to make perceptual judgments. 
Learning which strategy is best in which circumstance might be an important 
driving factor of perceptual development.

©2017 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12584
PMCID: PMC5947545
PMID: 28812307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12594. doi: 10.1111/desc.12594. Epub 2017 Sep 10.

The missing explanation of the false-belief advantage in bilingual children: a 
longitudinal study.

Diaz V(1), Farrar MJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Virginia Polytechnic and State University, 
Blacksburg, Virginia, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

Bilingual preschoolers often perform better than monolingual children on 
false-belief understanding. It has been hypothesized that this is due to their 
enhanced executive function skills, although this relationship has rarely been 
tested or supported. The current longitudinal study tested whether 
metalinguistic awareness was responsible for this advantage. Further, we 
examined the contributions of both executive functioning and language ability to 
false-belief understanding by including multiple measures of both. Seventy-eight 
children (n = 40 Spanish-English bilingual; age M = 49.29, SD = 7.38 and, n = 38 
English monolingual; age M = 47.75, SD = 6.86) were tested. A year later the 
children were tested again (n = 22 bilingual, n = 25 monolingual). The results 
indicated that language and executive function (inhibitory control) at time 1 
were related to false belief in monolinguals at time 2. In contrast, bilinguals' 
metalinguistic performance at time 1 was the sole predictor of false belief at 
time 2. The different linguistic and cognitive profiles of monolinguals and 
bilinguals may create different pathways for their development of false-belief 
understanding. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at: 
https://youtu.be/vILn2gKjFxw.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12594
PMID: 28891220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2):10.1111/desc.12532. doi: 10.1111/desc.12532. Epub 2017 
Feb 1.

Around the world, adolescence is a time of heightened sensation seeking and 
immature self-regulation.

Steinberg L(1)(2), Icenogle G(1), Shulman EP(3), Breiner K(4), Chein J(1), 
Bacchini D(5), Chang L(6), Chaudhary N(7), Giunta LD(8), Dodge KA(9), Fanti 
KA(10), Lansford JE(9), Malone PS(9), Oburu P(11), Pastorelli C(8), Skinner 
AT(9), Sorbring E(12), Tapanya S(13), Tirado LMU(14), Alampay LP(15), Al-Hassan 
SM(16), Takash HMS(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Temple University, Philadelphia, USA.
(2)King Abdulaziz University.
(3)Department of Psychology, Brock University, St Catherines, Canada.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
USA.
(5)Department of Psychology, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy.
(6)Department of Psychology, University of Macau, Macau.
(7)Department of Human Development and Childhood Studies, Lady Irwin College, 
University of Delhi, Delhi, India.
(8)Department of Psychology, Università di Roma, Roma, Italy.
(9)Center for Child and Family Policy, Duke University, Durham, USA.
(10)Department of Psychology, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus.
(11)Department of Educational Psychology, Maseno University, Maseno, Kenya.
(12)Department of Psychology, University West.
(13)Department of Psychiatry, Chiang Mai University, Thailand.
(14)Consultorio Psicológico Popular, Universidad San Buenaventura, Cali, 
Columbia.
(15)Department of Psychology, Ateneo de Manila University, Quezon City, the 
Philippines.
(16)Queen Rania Faculty for Childhood, Hashemite University, Zarqa, Jordan.

The dual systems model of adolescent risk-taking portrays the period as one 
characterized by a combination of heightened sensation seeking and 
still-maturing self-regulation, but most tests of this model have been conducted 
in the United States or Western Europe. In the present study, these propositions 
are tested in an international sample of more than 5000 individuals between ages 
10 and 30 years from 11 countries in Africa, Asia, Europe and the Americas, 
using a multi-method test battery that includes both self-report and 
performance-based measures of both constructs. Consistent with the dual systems 
model, sensation seeking increased between preadolescence and late adolescence, 
peaked at age 19, and declined thereafter, whereas self-regulation increased 
steadily from preadolescence into young adulthood, reaching a plateau between 
ages 23 and 26. Although there were some variations in the magnitude of the 
observed age trends, the developmental patterns were largely similar across 
countries.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12532
PMCID: PMC6473801
PMID: 28150391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12551. Epub 2017 Mar 12.

Mapping language to the world: the role of iconicity in the sign language input.

Perniss P(1), Lu JC(2), Morgan G(3), Vigliocco G(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Humanities, University of Brighton, UK.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, USA.
(3)Department of Language and Communication Science, City University London.
(4)Division of Psychology and Language Sciences, University College London.

Most research on the mechanisms underlying referential mapping has assumed that 
learning occurs in ostensive contexts, where label and referent co-occur, and 
that form and meaning are linked by arbitrary convention alone. In the present 
study, we focus on iconicity in language, that is, resemblance relationships 
between form and meaning, and on non-ostensive contexts, where label and 
referent do not co-occur. We approach the question of language learning from the 
perspective of the language input. Specifically, we look at child-directed 
language (CDL) in British Sign Language (BSL), a language rich in iconicity due 
to the affordances of the visual modality. We ask whether child-directed signing 
exploits iconicity in the language by highlighting the similarity mapping 
between form and referent. We find that CDL modifications occur more often with 
iconic signs than with non-iconic signs. Crucially, for iconic signs, 
modifications are more frequent in non-ostensive contexts than in ostensive 
contexts. Furthermore, we find that pointing dominates in ostensive contexts, 
and suggest that caregivers adjust the semiotic resources recruited in CDL to 
context. These findings offer first evidence for a role of iconicity in the 
language input and suggest that iconicity may be involved in referential mapping 
and language learning, particularly in non-ostensive contexts.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12551
PMID: 28295866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12600. doi: 10.1111/desc.12600. Epub 2017 Sep 27.

Probing the depth of infants' theory of mind: disunity in performance across 
paradigms.

Poulin-Dubois D(1), Yott J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Concordia University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

There is currently a hot debate in the literature regarding whether or not 
infants have a true theory of mind (ToM) understanding. According to the 
mentalistic view, infants possess the same false belief understanding that older 
children have but their competence is masked by task demands. On the other hand, 
others have proposed that preverbal infants are incapable of mental state 
attribution and simply respond to superficial features of the events in 
spontaneous-responses tasks. In the current study, we aimed to clarify the 
nature of infants' performance in tasks designed to assess implicit theory of 
mind (ToM) by adopting a within-subject design that involved testing 
18-month-old infants on two batteries of tasks measuring the same four ToM 
constructs (intention, desire, true belief, and false belief). One battery 
included tasks based on the violation-of- expectation (VOE) procedure, whereas 
the other set of tasks was based on the interactive, helping procedure. 
Replication of the original findings varied across tasks, due to methodological 
changes and the use of a within-subject design. Convergent validity was examined 
by comparing performance on VOE and interactive tasks that are considered to be 
measures of the same theory of mind concept. The results revealed no significant 
relations between performance on the pairs of tasks for any of the four ToM 
constructs measured. This pattern of results is discussed in terms of current 
conflicting accounts of infants' performance on implicit ToM tasks. A video 
abstract of this article can be viewed at: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U3vqfe_zdhA&feature=youtu.be.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12600
PMCID: PMC5871541
PMID: 28952180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12595. doi: 10.1111/desc.12595. Epub 2017 Sep 24.

Using individual functional channels of interest to study cortical development 
with fNIRS.

Powell LJ(1), Deen B(1)(2), Saxe R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Neural Systems, The Rockefeller University, New York, USA.

Functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) is a noninvasive neuroimaging 
technique that could be uniquely effective for investigating cortical function 
in human infants. However, prior efforts have been hampered by the difficulty of 
aligning arrays of fNIRS optodes placed on the scalp to anatomical or functional 
regions of underlying cortex. This challenge can be addressed by identifying 
channels of interest in individual participants, and then testing the 
reliability of those channels' response profiles in independent data. Using this 
approach, cortical regions with preferential responses to faces versus scenes, 
and to scenes versus faces, were observed reliably in both adults and infants. 
By contrast, standard analysis techniques did not reliably identify significant 
responses to both categories in either age group. These results reveal 
scene-responsive regions, and confirm face-responsive regions, in preverbal 
infants. More generally, the analysis approach will be a robust and sensitive 
tool for future characterization of the early functional development of the 
human brain.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12595
PMID: 28944612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12658. doi: 10.1111/desc.12658. Epub 2018 Mar 5.

Early development of letter specialization in left fusiform is associated with 
better word reading and smaller fusiform face area.

Centanni TM(1)(2), Norton ES(1)(3), Park A(1), Beach SD(1), Halverson K(1), 
Ozernov-Palchik O(4), Gaab N(4), Gabrieli J(1).

Author information:
(1)McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Texas Christian University, Fort Worth, Texas, USA.
(3)Roxelyn and Richard Pepper Department of Communication Sciences and 
Disorders, and Institute for Innovations in Developmental Sciences, Northwestern 
University, Evanston, Illinois, USA.
(4)Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

A functional region of left fusiform gyrus termed "the visual word form area" 
(VWFA) develops during reading acquisition to respond more strongly to printed 
words than to other visual stimuli. Here, we examined responses to letters among 
5- and 6-year-old early kindergarten children (N = 48) with little or no 
school-based reading instruction who varied in their reading ability. We used 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to measure responses to individual 
letters, false fonts, and faces in left and right fusiform gyri. We then 
evaluated whether signal change and size (spatial extent) of letter-sensitive 
cortex (greater activation for letters versus faces) and letter-specific cortex 
(greater activation for letters versus false fonts) in these regions related to 
(a) standardized measures of word-reading ability and (b) signal change and size 
of face-sensitive cortex (fusiform face area or FFA; greater activation for 
faces versus letters). Greater letter specificity, but not letter sensitivity, 
in left fusiform gyrus correlated positively with word reading scores. Across 
children, in the left fusiform gyrus, greater size of letter-sensitive cortex 
correlated with lesser size of FFA. These findings are the first to suggest that 
in beginning readers, development of letter responsivity in left fusiform cortex 
is associated with both better reading ability and also a reduction of the size 
of left FFA that may result in right-hemisphere dominance for face perception.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12658
PMCID: PMC6115291
PMID: 29504651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Dev Sci. 2019 Mar;22(2):e12753. doi: 10.1111/desc.12753. Epub 2018 Oct 3.

Enhancing the language development of toddlers in foster care by promoting 
foster parents' sensitivity: Results from a randomized controlled trial.

Raby KL(1), Freedman E(2), Yarger HA(3), Lind T(4)(5), Dozier M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(2)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Delaware, 
Newark, Delaware.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, 
California.
(5)Child and Adolescent Services Research Center, San Diego, California.

Young children in foster care are at increased risk for problematic language 
development, making early intervention a critical tool in enhancing these 
children's foundational language abilities. This study examined the efficacy of 
an early preventative intervention, Attachment and Biobehavioral Catch-up for 
Toddlers (ABC-T), in improving the receptive vocabulary abilities of toddlers 
placed in foster care. All the children had been removed from their biological 
parents' care and placed into foster care. When children were between 24 and 
36 months old, foster parents were contacted by research staff and consented to 
participate. Parents were randomly assigned using a random number generator to 
receive either ABC-T (n = 45), which aimed to promote sensitive parenting for 
children who have experienced early adversity, or a control intervention 
(n = 43). Foster children's receptive vocabulary skills were assessed 
post-intervention using the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, Third Edition, when 
children were between 36 and 60 months old. Children whose foster parents 
received ABC-T demonstrated more advanced receptive vocabulary abilities than 
children whose foster parents received the control intervention. The positive 
effect of ABC-T on foster children's receptive vocabulary was mediated by 
increases in foster parents' sensitivity during parent-child interactions. Trial 
registration: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01261806.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12753
PMCID: PMC6716063
PMID: 30230658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Dev Sci. 2019 Mar;22(2):e12743. doi: 10.1111/desc.12743. Epub 2018 Sep 27.

The reciprocal relation between sleep and memory in infancy: Memory-dependent 
adjustment of sleep spindles and spindle-dependent improvement of memories.

Friedrich M(1)(2), Mölle M(3), Friederici AD(2), Born J(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychology, Humboldt-University Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Neuropsychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and 
Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Center of Brain, Behavior and Metabolism (CBBM), University of Lübeck, 
Lubeck, Germany.
(4)Institute of Medical Psychology and Behavioral Neurobiology and Center for 
Integrative Neuroscience, University of Tübingen, Tubingen, Germany.

Sleep spindle activity in infants supports their formation of generalized 
memories during sleep, indicating that specific sleep processes affect the 
consolidation of memories early in life. Characteristics of sleep spindles 
depend on the infant's developmental state and are known to be associated with 
trait-like factors such as intelligence. It is, however, largely unknown which 
state-like factors affect sleep spindles in infancy. By varying infants' wake 
experience in a within-subject design, here we provide evidence for a learning- 
and memory-dependent modulation of infant spindle activity. In a 
lexical-semantic learning session before a nap, 14- to 16-month-old infants were 
exposed to unknown words as labels for exemplars of unknown object categories. 
In a memory test on the next day, generalization to novel category exemplars was 
tested. In a nonlearning control session preceding a nap on another day, the 
same infants heard known words as labels for exemplars of already known 
categories. Central-parietal fast sleep spindles increased after the encoding of 
unknown object-word pairings compared to known pairings, evidencing that an 
infant's spindle activity varies depending on its prior knowledge for newly 
encoded information. Correlations suggest that enhanced spindle activity was 
particularly triggered, when similar unknown pairings were not generalized 
immediately during encoding. The spindle increase triggered by previously not 
generalized object-word pairings, moreover, boosted the formation of generalized 
memories for these pairings. Overall, the results provide first evidence for a 
fine-tuned regulation of infant sleep quality according to current consolidation 
requirements, which improves the infant long-term memory for new experiences.

© 2018 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12743
PMCID: PMC6585722
PMID: 30160012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12722. doi: 10.1111/desc.12722. Epub 2018 Aug 19.

The old, the new, and the in-between: Preadolescents' use of stylistic variation 
in speech in projecting their own identity in a culturally changing environment.

Jacewicz E(1), Fox RA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Speech and Hearing Science, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Cultural learning begins early, with infants' and young children's initial 
imitations of group-specific local behaviors. Comparatively little is known 
about cultural development in older children, whose more advanced 
socio-cognitive skills can moderate their decisions about adherence to the 
established cultural conventions and acceptance of new norms. Focusing on the 
acquisition of a regional dialect, the current study was conducted in a small 
community in western North Carolina, whose rich Appalachian heritage grew from 
distinctive cultural and living traditions. The region has gradually opened up 
to outside influences and the local culture is now shifting toward mainstream 
American socio-cultural norms. The study sought to determine how preadolescents 
positioned themselves in this socio-culturally changing environment. Using 
detailed acoustic analysis to measure stylistic variation in speech in 
9-12-year-olds and perceptual ratings to verify its salience, we examined the 
pronunciation of the vowel /ai/ to test children's adherence to the old 
Appalachian identity marker (the monophthong) and their acceptance of the modern 
American society (the diphthong). As an innovation, children created an 
intermediate phonetic variant that reduced the pronunciation differences between 
the old and modern patterns. Demonstrating the ability to adapt speech style to 
context, they increased the degree of diphthongization in this /ai/-variant in 
careful speech (reading), and reduced it in casual conversations. Girls' 
productions were more diphthongal than were boys' in reading but not in 
conversations. The new variant in children represents regional dialect 
levelling, and likely results from their accommodation to the changing 
environment, which promotes reduction of old marked forms.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12722
PMID: 30125051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12676. doi: 10.1111/desc.12676. Epub 2018 Apr 25.

Children's neural processing of moral scenarios provides insight into the 
formation and reduction of in-group biases.

Meidenbauer KL(1), Cowell JM(1)(2), Decety J(1).

Author information:
(1)The Child Neurosuite, Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, 
Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin Green Bay, Wisconsin, USA.

Survival is dependent on sociality within groups which ensure sustenance and 
protection. From an early age, children show a natural tendency to sort people 
into groups and discriminate among them. The computations guiding evaluation of 
third-party behaviors are complex, requiring integration of intent, 
consequences, and knowledge of group affiliation. This study examined how 
perceiving third-party morally laden behavior influences children's likelihood 
to exhibit or reduce group bias. Following a minimal group paradigm assignment, 
young children (4-7 years) performed a moral evaluation task where group 
affiliations and moral actions were systematically juxtaposed, so that they were 
exposed to disproportionately antisocial in-group and prosocial out-group 
scenarios. Electroencephalography was recorded, and group preference was 
assessed with a resource allocation game before and after the EEG session. 
Across all children, evaluations of others' moral actions arose from early and 
automatic processing (~150 ms), followed by later interactive processing of 
affiliation and moral valence (~500 ms). Importantly, individual differences in 
bias manifestation and attitude change were predicted by children's neural 
responses. Children with high baseline bias selectively exhibited a rapid 
detection (~200 ms) of scenarios inconsistent with their bias (in-group harm and 
out-group help). Changes in bias corresponded to distinct patterns in longer 
latency neural processing. These new developmental neuroscience findings 
elucidate the multifaceted processing involved in moral evaluation of others' 
actions, their group affiliations, the nature of the integration of both into 
full judgments, and the relation of individual differences in neural responses 
to social decision-making in childhood.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12676
PMID: 29691954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Dev Sci. 2020 Oct 16:e13049. doi: 10.1111/desc.13049. Online ahead of print.

Children's interpretation of ambiguous pronouns based on prior discourse.

Bohn M(1)(2), Le KN(1), Peloquin B(1), Köymen B(3), Frank MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(2)Leipzig Research Center for Early Child Development, Leipzig University, 
Leipzig, Germany.
(3)School of Health Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

In conversation, individual utterances are almost always ambiguous, with this 
ambiguity resolved by context and discourse history (common ground). One 
important cue for disambiguation is the topic under discussion with a particular 
partner (e.g., "want to pick?" means something different in a conversation with 
a bluegrass musician vs. with a book club partner). Here, we investigated 2- to 
5-year-old American English-speaking children's (N = 131) reliance on 
conversational topics with specific partners to interpret ambiguous or novel 
words. In a tablet-based game, children heard a speaker consistently refer to 
objects from a category without mentioning the category itself. In Study 1, 3- 
and 4-year-olds interpreted the ambiguous pronoun "it" as referring to another 
member of the same category. In Study 2, only 4-year-olds interpreted the 
pronoun as referring to the implied category when talking to the same speaker 
but not when talking to a new speaker. Thus, children's conception of what 
constitutes common ground in discourse develops substantially between ages 2 and 
5.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13049
PMID: 33064923


398. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2):10.1111/desc.12543. doi: 10.1111/desc.12543. Epub 2017 
May 4.

Semantic richness and word learning in children with autism spectrum disorder.

Gladfelter A(1), Goffman L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, Purdue University, West 
Lafayette, IN, USA.

Semantically rich learning contexts facilitate semantic, phonological, and 
articulatory aspects of word learning in children with typical development (TD). 
However, because children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) show differences 
at each of these processing levels, it is unclear whether they will benefit from 
semantic cues in the same manner as their typical peers. The goal of this study 
was to track how the inclusion of rich, sparse, or no semantic cues influences 
semantic, phonological, and articulatory aspects of word learning in children 
with ASD and TD over time. Twenty-four school-aged children (12 in each group), 
matched on expressive vocabulary, participated in an extended word learning 
paradigm. Performance on five measures of learning (referent identification, 
confrontation naming, defining, phonetic accuracy, and speech motor stability) 
were tracked across three sessions approximately one week apart to assess the 
influence of semantic richness on extended learning. Results indicate that 
children with ASD benefit from semantically rich learning contexts similarly to 
their peers with TD; however, one key difference between the two groups emerged 
- the children with ASD showed heightened shifts in speech motor stability. 
These findings offer insights into common learning mechanisms in children with 
ASD and TD, as well as pointing to a potentially distinct speech motor learning 
trajectory in children with ASD, providing a window into the emergence of 
stereotypic vocalizations in these children.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12543
PMCID: PMC5671375
PMID: 28470820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12626. doi: 10.1111/desc.12626. Epub 2017 Oct 26.

See and be seen: Infant-caregiver social looking during locomotor free play.

Franchak JM(1), Kretch KS(2), Adolph KE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Riverside, California, 
USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, New York University, New York, USA.

Face-to-face interaction between infants and their caregivers is a mainstay of 
developmental research. However, common laboratory paradigms for studying dyadic 
interaction oversimplify the act of looking at the partner's face by seating 
infants and caregivers face to face in stationary positions. In less constrained 
conditions when both partners are freely mobile, infants and caregivers must 
move their heads and bodies to look at each other. We hypothesized that face 
looking and mutual gaze for each member of the dyad would decrease with 
increased motor costs of looking. To test this hypothesis, 12-month-old crawling 
and walking infants and their parents wore head-mounted eye trackers to record 
eye movements of each member of the dyad during locomotor free play in a large 
toy-filled playroom. Findings revealed that increased motor costs decreased face 
looking and mutual gaze: Each partner looked less at the other's face when their 
own posture or the other's posture required more motor effort to gain visual 
access to the other's face. Caregivers mirrored infants' posture by spending 
more time down on the ground when infants were prone, perhaps to facilitate face 
looking. Infants looked more at toys than at their caregiver's face, but 
caregivers looked at their infant's face and at toys in equal amounts. 
Furthermore, infants looked less at toys and faces compared to studies that used 
stationary tasks, suggesting that the attentional demands differ in an 
unconstrained locomotor task. Taken together, findings indicate that 
ever-changing motor constraints affect real-life social looking.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12626
PMCID: PMC5920801
PMID: 29071760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12583. doi: 10.1111/desc.12583. Epub 2017 Jul 4.

Age-related differences in subjective recollection: ERP studies of encoding and 
retrieval.

Rollins L(1), Riggins T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Christopher Newport University, Newport News, VA, 
USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA.

The ability to mentally re-experience past events improves significantly from 
childhood to young adulthood; however, the mechanisms underlying this ability 
remain poorly understood, partially because different tasks are used across the 
lifespan. This study was designed to address this gap by assessing the 
development of event-related potential (ERP) correlates associated with 
subjective indices of recollection. Children, adolescents, and adults performed 
Tulving's () remember/know paradigm while ERPs were recorded during memory 
encoding (Experiment 1) and retrieval (Experiment 2). Behaviorally, children 
recognized fewer items than adolescents and adults. All age groups reliably made 
subjective judgments of recollection, although the ability to make these 
judgments improved with age. At encoding, the ERP effect associated with 
recollection was present and comparable across age groups. In contrast, the ERP 
effect associated with recollection at retrieval differed as a function of age 
group; specifically, this effect was absent in children, topographically 
widespread in adolescents, and, consistent with previous literature, maximal 
over left centro-parietal leads in adults. These findings suggest that encoding 
processes associated with the subsequent subjective experience of recollection 
may be similar among children, adolescents, and adults and that age-related 
improvement in recollection may be primarily attributable to the development of 
processes that follow the initial encoding of stimuli (i.e., consolidation, 
storage, retrieval).

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12583
PMID: 28677331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):1095-1103. doi: 10.1111/desc.12386. Epub 2015 Dec 21.

Unimpaired attentional disengagement in toddlers with autism spectrum disorder.

Fischer J(1), Smith H(2), Martinez-Pedraza F(2), Carter AS(2), Kanwisher N(3), 
Kaldy Z(2).

Author information:
(1)McGovern Institute for Brain Research and Department of Brain and Cognitive 
Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. 
jason_f@mit.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(3)McGovern Institute for Brain Research and Department of Brain and Cognitive 
Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

A prominent hypothesis holds that 'sticky' attention early in life in children 
with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) limits their ability to explore and learn 
about the world. Under this hypothesis, the core clinical symptoms of ASD - 
restricted interests, repetitive behaviors and impaired social/communication 
abilities - could all result from impaired attentional disengagement during 
development. However, the existence of disengagement deficits in children with 
ASD is controversial, and a recent study found no deficit in 5- to 12-year-olds 
with ASD. Nonetheless, the possibility remains that disengagement is impaired 
earlier in development in children with ASD, altering their developmental 
trajectory even if the attentional deficit itself is remediated or compensated 
for by the time children with ASD reach school age. Here, we tested this 
possibility by characterizing attentional disengagement in a group of toddlers 
just diagnosed with ASD (age 21 to 37 months). We found strikingly similar 
performance between the ASD and age-matched typically developing (TD) toddlers, 
and no evidence of impaired attentional disengagement. These results show that 
even at a young age when the clinical symptoms of ASD are first emerging, 
disengagement abilities are intact. Sticky attention is not a fundamental 
characteristic of ASD, and probably does not play a causal role in its etiology.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12386
PMCID: PMC4916039
PMID: 26690733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12558. doi: 10.1111/desc.12558. Epub 2017 Mar 2.

Peripheral and central contribution to the difficulty of speech in noise 
perception in dyslexic children.

Calcus A(1)(2)(3), Deltenre P(3), Colin C(2)(3), Kolinsky R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique - FNRS (FRS-FNRS), France.
(2)Unité de Recherche en Neurosciences Cognitives (UNESCOG), Center for Research 
in Cognition & Neurosciences (CRCN), Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), 
Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Laboratoire de Neurophysiologie Sensorielle et Cognitive, Hôpital Brugmann, 
Brussels, Belgium.

Noise typically induces both peripheral and central masking of an auditory 
target. Whereas the idea that a deficit of speech in noise perception is 
inherent to dyslexia is still debated, most studies have actually focused on the 
peripheral contribution to the dyslexics' difficulties of perceiving speech in 
noise. Here, we investigated the respective contribution of both peripheral and 
central noise in three groups of children: dyslexic, chronological age matched 
controls (CA), and reading-level matched controls (RL). In all noise conditions, 
dyslexics displayed significantly lower performance than CA controls. However, 
they performed similarly or even better than RL controls. Scrutinizing 
individual profiles failed to reveal a strong consistency in the speech 
perception difficulties experienced across all noise conditions, or across noise 
conditions and reading-related performances. Taken together, our results thus 
suggest that both peripheral and central interference contribute to the poorer 
speech in noise perception of dyslexic children, but that this difficulty is not 
a core deficit inherent to dyslexia.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12558
PMID: 28256107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2):10.1111/desc.12529. doi: 10.1111/desc.12529. Epub 2017 
May 30.

A meta-analysis of the relationship between socioeconomic status and executive 
function performance among children.

Lawson GM(1), Hook CJ(2), Farah MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, USA.

The relationship between childhood socioeconomic status (SES) and executive 
function (EF) has recently attracted attention within psychology, following 
reports of substantial SES disparities in children's EF. Adding to the 
importance of this relationship, EF has been proposed as a mediator of 
socioeconomic disparities in lifelong achievement and health. However, evidence 
about the relationship between childhood SES and EF is mixed, and there has been 
no systematic attempt to evaluate this relationship across studies. This 
meta-analysis systematically reviewed the literature for studies in which 
samples of children varying in SES were evaluated on EF, including studies with 
and without primary hypotheses about SES. The analysis included 8760 children 
between the ages of 2 and 18 gathered from 25 independent samples. Analyses 
showed a small but statistically significant correlation between SES and EF 
across all studies (rrandom  = .16, 95% CI [.12, .21]) without correcting for 
attenuation owing to range restriction or measurement unreliability. Substantial 
heterogeneity was observed among studies, and a number of factors, including the 
amount of SES variability in the sample and the number of EF measures used, 
emerged as moderators. Using only the 15 studies with meaningful SES variability 
in the sample, the average correlation between SES and EF was small-to-medium in 
size (rrandom  = .22, 95% CI [.17, .27]). Using only the six studies with 
multiple measures of EF, the relationship was medium in size (rrandom  = .28, 
95% CI [.18, .37]). In sum, this meta-analysis supports the presence of SES 
disparities in EF and suggests that they are between small and medium in size, 
depending on the methods used to measure them.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12529
PMCID: PMC5821589
PMID: 28557154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12647. doi: 10.1111/desc.12647. Epub 2018 Feb 6.

Vocabulary growth rate from preschool to school-age years is reflected in the 
connectivity of the arcuate fasciculus in 14-year-old children.

Su M(1)(2)(3), Thiebaut de Schotten M(4), Zhao J(5), Song S(1)(6), Zhou W(7), 
Gong G(1), McBride C(8), Ramus F(2), Shu H(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning & IDG/McGovern 
Institute for Brain Research, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China.
(2)Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et Psycholinguistique (ENS, CNRS, EHESS), 
Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University, Paris, France.
(3)College of Elementary Education, Capital Normal University, Beijing, China.
(4)Brain Connectivity and Behaviour Group, Brain and Spine Institute (ICM), 
CNRS, UMR 7225, INSERM-UPMC, UMRS 1127, Paris, France.
(5)School of Psychology, Shaanxi Normal University and Key Laboratory for 
Behavior and Cognitive Neuroscience of Shaanxi Province, Xi'an, China.
(6)College of Teacher Education, Capital Normal University, Beijing, China.
(7)Beijing Key Lab of Learning and Cognition, School of Psychology, Capital 
Normal University, Beijing, China.
(8)Department of Psychology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
China.

The acquisition of language involves the functional specialization of several 
cortical regions. Connectivity between these brain regions may also change with 
the development of language. Various studies have demonstrated that the arcuate 
fasciculus was essential for language function. Vocabulary learning is one of 
the most important skills in language acquisition. In the present longitudinal 
study, we explored the influence of vocabulary development on the anatomical 
properties of the arcuate fasciculus. Seventy-nine Chinese children participated 
in this study. Between age 4 and age 10, they were administered the same 
vocabulary task repeatedly. Following a previous study, children's vocabulary 
developmental trajectories were clustered into three subgroups (consistently 
good, catch-up, consistently poor). At age 14, diffusion tensor imaging data 
were collected. Using ROI-based tractography, the anterior, posterior and direct 
segments of the bilateral arcuate fasciculus were delineated in each child's 
native space. Group comparisons showed a significantly reduced fractional 
anisotropy in the left arcuate fasciculus of children in the consistently poor 
group, in particular in the posterior and direct segments of the arcuate 
fasciculus. No group differences were observed in the right hemisphere, nor in 
the left anterior segment. Further regression analyses showed that the rate of 
vocabulary development, rather than the initial vocabulary size, was a specific 
predictor of the left arcuate fasciculus connectivity.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12647
PMID: 29411464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Dev Sci. 2017 Nov;20(6):10.1111/desc.12456. doi: 10.1111/desc.12456. Epub 2017 
Jan 16.

Power in methods: language to infants in structured and naturalistic contexts.

Tamis-LeMonda CS(1), Kuchirko Y(1), Luo R(1), Escobar K(1), Bornstein MH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Psychology, New York University, USA.
(2)Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Methods can powerfully affect conclusions about infant experiences and learning. 
Data from naturalistic observations may paint a very different picture of 
learning and development from those based on structured tasks, as illustrated in 
studies of infant walking, object permanence, intention understanding, and so 
forth. Using language as a model system, we compared the speech of 40 mothers to 
their 13-month-old infants during structured play and naturalistic home 
routines. The contrasting methods yielded unique portrayals of infant language 
experiences, while simultaneously underscoring cross-situational correspondence 
at an individual level. Infants experienced substantially more total words and 
different words per minute during structured play than they did during 
naturalistic routines. Language input during structured play was consistently 
dense from minute to minute, whereas language during naturalistic routines 
showed striking fluctuations interspersed with silence. Despite these 
differences, infants' language experiences during structured play mirrored the 
peak language interactions infants experienced during naturalistic routines, and 
correlations between language inputs in the two conditions were strong. The 
implications of developmental methods for documenting the nature of experiences 
and individual differences are discussed.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12456
PMCID: PMC5865594
PMID: 28093889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Dev Sci. 2019 May;22(3):e12762. doi: 10.1111/desc.12762. Epub 2018 Nov 26.

Parent coaching at 6 and 10 months improves language outcomes at 14 months: A 
randomized controlled trial.

Ferjan Ramírez N(1), Lytle SR(1), Fish M(1), Kuhl PK(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Learning & Brain Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington.

Previous studies reveal an association between particular features of parental 
language input and advances in children's language learning. However, it is not 
known whether parent coaching aimed to enhance specific input components would 
(a) successfully increase these components in parents' language input and (b) 
result in concurrent increases in children's language development. The present 
randomized controlled trial assigned families of typically developing 
6-month-old infants to Intervention (parent coaching) and Control (no coaching) 
groups. Families were equivalent on socioeconomic status, infants' gender, and 
infants' age. Parent coaching took place when infants were 6 and 10 months of 
age, and included quantitative and qualitative linguistic feedback on the amount 
of child-directed speech, back-and-forth interactions, and parentese speech 
style. These variables were derived from each family's first-person LENA 
recordings at home. Input variables and infant language were measured at 6, 10, 
and 14 months. Parent coaching significantly enhanced language input as measured 
by two social interaction variables: percentage of speech directed to the child 
and percentage of parentese speech. These two variables were correlated, and 
were both related to growth in infant babbling between 6 and 14 months. 
Intervention infants showed greater growth in babbling than Control infants. 
Furthermore, at 14 months, Intervention infants produced significantly more 
words than Control infants, as indicated by LENA recordings and parent report 
via the MacArthur-Bates Communicative Developmental Inventory. Together, these 
results indicate that parent coaching can enrich specific aspects of parental 
language input, and can immediately and positively impact child language 
outcomes. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at: 
https://youtu.be/7wqR28gPiwo.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12762
PMID: 30318708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12631. doi: 10.1111/desc.12631. Epub 2017 Nov 15.

Amygdala sub-regional functional connectivity predicts anxiety in children with 
reading disorder.

Davis K(1)(2), Margolis AE(1)(2), Thomas L(1)(2), Huo Z(1)(2), Marsh R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)The Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry in the Department of 
Psychiatry, the New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York.
(2)The College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, USA.

Pediatric reading disorder (RD) is associated with an increased risk of anxiety 
symptoms, yet understudied are the neurobiological factors that might underlie 
anxiety in children with RD. Given the role of the amygdala in anxiety, we 
assessed resting state functional connectivity of amygdalar subregions in 
children with RD to identify functional correlates of anxiety and reading 
impairment. We collected resting state functional MRI data from 22 children with 
RD and 21 typically developing (TD) children, ages 7 to 13 years. We assessed 
group differences in resting state functional connectivity (RSFC) from amygdalar 
subregions. Associations of amygdalar RSFC and volume with reading impairment, 
reading fluency scores, and anxiety symptoms were explored. Relative to TD 
children, those with RD showed increased RSFC from amygdalar nuclei to medial 
prefrontal cortex. Across all subjects, RSFC from right centromedial amygdala to 
left medial prefrontal cortex positively predicted both reading impairment and 
self-reported anxiety, and anxiety mediated the relationship between RSFC and 
reading impairment. These findings are consistent with amygdalar functional 
abnormalities in pediatric anxiety disorders, suggesting a common 
neurobiological mechanism underlying anxiety and reading impairment in children. 
Thus, aberrant patterns of RSFC from amygdalar subregions may serve as potential 
targets for the treatment of anxiety symptoms that typically co-occur with RD. 
Our dimensional approach to studying anxiety in RD revealed how amygdalar 
connectivity underlies anxiety and reading impairment across a continuum from 
normal to abnormal.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12631
PMCID: PMC6042207
PMID: 29143475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12670. doi: 10.1111/desc.12670. Epub 2018 Apr 30.

Training with a three-dimensional multiple object-tracking (3D-MOT) paradigm 
improves attention in students with a neurodevelopmental condition: a randomized 
controlled trial.

Tullo D(1), Guy J(1)(2), Faubert J(3), Bertone A(1).

Author information:
(1)Educational and Counselling Psychology, McGill University, Montréal, Canada.
(2)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(3)École d'optométrie, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada.

The efficacy of attention training paradigms is influenced by many factors, 
including the specificity of targeted cognitive processes, accuracy of outcome 
measures, accessibility to specialized populations, and adaptability to user 
capability. These issues are increasingly significant when working with children 
diagnosed with neurodevelopmental conditions that are characterized by 
attentional difficulties. This study investigated the efficacy of training 
attention in students with neurodevelopmental conditions using a novel 
three-dimensional Multiple Object-Tracking (3D-MOT) task. All students (ages 
6-18 years) performed the Conners Continuous Performance Task (CPT-3) as a 
baseline measure of attention. They were then equally and randomly assigned to 
one of three groups: a treatment group, (3D-MOT); an active control group 
(visual strategy/math-based game, 2048); and a treatment as usual group. 
Students were trained on their respective tasks for a total of 15 training 
sessions over a five-week period and then reassessed on the CPT-3. Results 
showed that post-training CPT-3 performance significantly improved from baseline 
for participants in the treatment group only. This improvement indicates that 
training with 3D-MOT increased attentional abilities in students with 
neurodevelopmental conditions. These results suggest that training attention 
with a non-verbal, visual-based task is feasible in a school setting and 
accessible to atypically developing students with attentional difficulties.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12670
PMID: 29707864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2):10.1111/desc.12548. doi: 10.1111/desc.12548. Epub 2017 
Feb 3.

Learning across languages: bilingual experience supports dual language 
statistical word segmentation.

Antovich DM(1), Graf Estes K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Davis, USA.

Bilingual acquisition presents learning challenges beyond those found in 
monolingual environments, including the need to segment speech in two languages. 
Infants may use statistical cues, such as syllable-level transitional 
probabilities, to segment words from fluent speech. In the present study we 
assessed monolingual and bilingual 14-month-olds' abilities to segment two 
artificial languages using transitional probability cues. In Experiment 1, 
monolingual infants successfully segmented the speech streams when the languages 
were presented individually. However, monolinguals did not segment the same 
language stimuli when they were presented together in interleaved segments, 
mimicking the language switches inherent to bilingual speech. To assess the 
effect of real-world bilingual experience on dual language speech segmentation, 
Experiment 2 tested infants with regular exposure to two languages using the 
same interleaved language stimuli as Experiment 1. The bilingual infants in 
Experiment 2 successfully segmented the languages, indicating that early 
exposure to two languages supports infants' abilities to segment dual language 
speech using transitional probability cues. These findings support the notion 
that early bilingual exposure prepares infants to navigate challenging aspects 
of dual language environments as they begin to acquire two languages.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12548
PMCID: PMC6594691
PMID: 28156032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Dev Sci. 2020 Oct 8:e13043. doi: 10.1111/desc.13043. Online ahead of print.

More than the sum of its parts: Exploring the development of ratio magnitude 
versus simple magnitude perception.

Park Y(1), Viegut AA(1), Matthews PG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Educational Psychology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, 
USA.

Humans perceptually extract quantity information from our environments, be it 
from simple stimuli in isolation, or from relational magnitudes formed by taking 
ratios of pairs of simple stimuli. Some have proposed that these two types of 
magnitude are processed by a common system, whereas others have proposed 
separate systems. To test these competing possibilities, the present study 
examined the developmental trajectories of simple and relational magnitude 
discrimination and relations among these abilities for preschoolers (n = 42), 
2nd-graders (n = 31), 5th-graders (n = 29), and adults (n = 32). Participants 
completed simple magnitude and ratio discrimination tasks in four different 
nonsymbolic formats, using dots, lines, circles, and irregular blobs. All age 
cohorts accurately discriminated both simple and ratio magnitudes. 
Discriminability differed by format such that performance was highest with line 
and lowest with dot stimuli. Moreover, developmental trajectories calculated for 
each format were similar across simple and ratio discriminations. Although some 
characteristics were similar for both types of discrimination, ratio acuity in a 
given format was more closely related with ratio acuities in alternate formats 
than to within-format simple magnitude acuity. Results demonstrate that ratio 
magnitude processing shares several similarities to simple magnitude processing, 
but is also substantially different.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13043
PMID: 33030291


411. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12633. doi: 10.1111/desc.12633. Epub 2017 Nov 29.

Age-related changes in the dynamics of fear-related regulation in early 
childhood.

Morales S(1)(2), Ram N(3)(4), Buss KA(1), Cole PM(1), Helm JL(5), Chow SM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
PA, USA.
(2)Department of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology, University of 
Maryland, College Park, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Human Development and Family Studies, The Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, PA, USA.
(4)German Institute for Economic Research (DIW), Berlin, Germany.
(5)Department of Psychology, San Diego State University, San Diego, CA, USA.

Self-regulation is a dynamic process wherein executive processes (EP) delay, 
minimize or desist prepotent responses (PR) that arise in situations that 
threaten well-being. It is generally assumed that, over the course of early 
childhood, children expand and more effectively deploy their repertoire of 
EP-related strategies to regulate PR. However, longitudinal tests of these 
assumptions are scarce in part because self-regulation has been mostly studied 
as a static construct. This study engages dynamic systems modeling to examine 
developmental changes in self-regulation between ages 2 and 5 years. 
Second-by-second time-series data derived from behavioral observations of 112 
children (63 boys) faced with novel laboratory-based situations designed to 
elicit wariness, hesitation, and fear were modeled using differential equation 
models designed to capture age-related changes in the intrinsic dynamics and 
bidirectional coupling of PR (fear/wariness) and EP (strategy use). Results 
revealed that dynamic models allow for the conceptualization and measurement of 
fear regulation as intrinsic processes as well as direct and indirect coupling 
between PR and EP. Several patterns of age-related changes were in line with 
developmental theory suggesting that PR weakened and was regulated more quickly 
and efficiently by EP at age 5 than at age 2. However, most findings were in the 
intrinsic dynamics and moderating influences between PR and EP rather than 
direct influences. The findings illustrate the precision with which specific 
aspects of self-regulation can be articulated using dynamic systems models, and 
how such models can be used to describe the development of self-regulation in 
nuanced and theoretically meaningful ways.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12633
PMID: 29193491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12641. doi: 10.1111/desc.12641. Epub 2017 Dec 17.

The social functions of babbling: acoustic and contextual characteristics that 
facilitate maternal responsiveness.

Albert RR(1), Schwade JA(2), Goldstein MH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Lebanon Valley College, Annville, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.

What is the social function of babbling? An important function of prelinguistic 
vocalizing may be to elicit parental behavior in ways that facilitate the 
infant's own learning about speech and language. Infants use parental feedback 
to their babbling to learn new vocal forms, but the microstructure of parental 
responses to babbling has not been studied. To enable precise manipulation of 
the proximal infant cues that may influence maternal behavior, we used a 
playback paradigm to assess mothers' responsiveness to prerecorded audiovisual 
clips of unfamiliar infants' noncry prelinguistic vocalizations and actions. 
Acoustic characteristics and directedness of vocalizations were manipulated to 
test their efficacy in structuring social interactions. We also compared 
maternal responsiveness in the playback paradigm and in free play with their own 
infants. Maternal patterns of reactions to babbling were stable across both 
tasks. In the playback task, we found specific vocal cues, such as the degree of 
resonance and the transition timing of consonant-vowel syllables, predicted 
contingent maternal responding. Vocalizations directed at objects also 
facilitated increased responsiveness. The responses mothers exhibited, such as 
sensitive speech and vocal imitation, are known to facilitate vocal learning and 
development. Infants, by influencing the behavior of their caregivers with their 
babbling, create social interactions that facilitate their own communicative 
development.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12641
PMCID: PMC6004332
PMID: 29250872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):1035-1048. doi: 10.1111/desc.12339. Epub 2015 Aug 25.

Developmental consequences of behavioral inhibition: a model in rhesus monkeys 
(Macaca mulatta).

Chun K(1)(2), Capitanio JP(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)California National Primate Research Center, USA. kchun@ucdavis.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of California, Davis, USA. 
kchun@ucdavis.edu.
(3)California National Primate Research Center, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of California, Davis, USA.

In children, behavioral inhibition is characterized by a disposition to withdraw 
in the presence of strangers and novel situations. Later in life, behavioral 
inhibition can result in an increased risk for anxiety and depression and a 
decrease in social behavior. We selected rhesus monkeys that, during infancy, 
showed evidence of behavioral inhibition in response to separation, and 
contrasted them with non-inhibited peers. To understand the development of 
behavioral inhibition at juvenile age, we collected behavioral data in response 
to relocation; in response to a human intruder challenge; and in naturalistic 
outdoor field corrals. At 4 years of age (young adulthood), we again collected 
behavioral data in the outdoor field corrals to understand the adult social 
consequences of behavioral inhibition. We also included sex, dominance rank, and 
number of available kin in our analyses. Finally, to understand the consistency 
in behavior in behaviorally inhibited animals, we conducted exploratory analyses 
contrasting behaviorally inhibited animals that showed high vs. low durations of 
non-social behaviors as adults. At juvenile age, behaviorally inhibited animals 
continued to show behavioral differences in the novel testing room and during 
the human intruder challenge, generally showing evidence of greater anxiety and 
emotionality compared to non-inhibited controls. In their outdoor corrals, 
behaviorally inhibited juveniles spent more time alone and less time in 
proximity and grooming with mother and other adult females. In young adulthood, 
we found that behavioral inhibition was not related to time spent alone. We did 
find that duration of time alone in adulthood was related to time alone 
exhibited as juveniles; sex, dominance rank, or the number of kin were not 
influential in adult non-social duration, either as main effects or as 
moderators. Finally, exploratory analyses revealed that behaviorally inhibited 
females that were more sociable (less time spent alone) as adults had spent more 
time grooming as juveniles, suggesting that high-quality social interaction at a 
young age might mitigate the social consequences of behavioral inhibition. 
Overall, we believe that the many similarities with the human data that we found 
suggest that this monkey model of naturally occurring behavioral inhibition can 
be valuable for understanding social development.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12339
PMCID: PMC5369653
PMID: 26307016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12546. Epub 2017 Feb 15.

Dorsal stream function in the young child: an fMRI investigation of visually 
guided action.

James KH(1), Kersey AJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 
Bloomington, IN, USA.
(2)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester, 
Rochester, NY, USA.

Visually guided action is a ubiquitous component of human behavior, but the 
neural substrates that support the development of this behavior are unknown. 
Here we take an initial step in documenting visual-motor system development in 
the young (4- to 7-year-old) child. Through functional MRI and by using a new 
technique to measure the mechanisms underlying real-time visually guided action 
in the MRI environment, we demonstrate that children rely primarily on the IPS 
and cerebellum for this complex behavior. This pattern is consistent across 
three different visually guided actions, suggesting generalizability of these 
neural substrates across such tasks. However, minor differences in neural 
processing across tasks were also demonstrated. Overall, results are interpreted 
as demonstrating that the functions of the dorsal stream can be viewed as fairly 
mature in the young child. These results provide a benchmark for future studies 
that aim to understand the development of the neural circuitry for visually 
guided action.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12546
PMID: 28198161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12637. doi: 10.1111/desc.12637. Epub 2017 Dec 17.

Selective copying of the majority suggests children are broadly "optimal-" 
rather than "over-" imitators.

Evans CL(1)(2), Laland KN(1), Carpenter M(3)(4), Kendal RL(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Biology, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, UK.
(2)Department of Linguistic and Cultural Evolution, Max Planck Institute for the 
Science of Human History, Jena, Germany.
(3)School of Psychology & Neuroscience, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, 
UK.
(4)Department of Developmental and Comparative Psychology, Max Planck Institute 
for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(5)Centre for Coevolution of Biology & Culture, Anthropology Department, Durham 
University, UK.

Human children, in contrast to other species, are frequently cast as prolific 
"over-imitators". However, previous studies of "over-imitation" have overlooked 
many important real-world social dynamics, and may thus provide an inaccurate 
account of this seemingly puzzling and potentially maladaptive phenomenon. Here 
we investigate this topic using a cultural evolutionary approach, focusing 
particularly on the key adaptive learning strategy of majority-biased copying. 
Most "over-imitation" research has been conducted using consistent 
demonstrations to the observer, but we systematically varied the frequency of 
demonstrators that 4- to 6-year-old children observed performing a causally 
irrelevant action. Children who "over-imitate" inflexibly should copy the 
majority regardless of whether the majority solution omits or includes a 
causally irrelevant action. However, we found that children calibrated their 
tendency to acquire the majority behavior, such that copying did not extend to 
majorities that performed irrelevant actions. These results are consistent with 
a highly functional, adaptive integration of social and causal information, 
rather than explanations implying unselective copying or causal 
misunderstanding. This suggests that our species might be better characterized 
as broadly "optimal-" rather than "over-" imitators.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12637
PMID: 29250871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12639. doi: 10.1111/desc.12639. Epub 2017 Dec 11.

Consolidation of vocabulary is associated with sleep in typically developing 
children, but not in children with dyslexia.

Smith FRH(1), Gaskell MG(2), Weighall AR(3), Warmington M(4), Reid AM(2), 
Henderson LM(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Education, Communication and Language Sciences, Newcastle 
University, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of York, York, UK.
(3)Institute of Psychological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
(4)Department of Human Communication Sciences, University of Sheffield, 
Sheffield, UK.

Sleep is known to play an active role in consolidating new vocabulary in adults; 
however, the mechanisms by which sleep promotes vocabulary consolidation in 
childhood are less well understood. Furthermore, there has been no investigation 
into whether previously reported differences in sleep architecture might account 
for variability in vocabulary consolidation in children with dyslexia. 
Twenty-three children with dyslexia and 29 age-matched typically developing 
peers were exposed to 16 novel spoken words. Typically developing children 
showed overnight improvements in novel word recall; the size of the improvement 
correlated positively with slow wave activity, similar to previous findings with 
adults. Children with dyslexia showed poorer recall of the novel words overall, 
but nevertheless showed overnight improvements similar to age-matched peers. 
However, comparisons with younger children matched on initial levels of novel 
word recall pointed to reduced consolidation in dyslexics after 1 week. 
Crucially, there were no significant correlations between overnight 
consolidation and sleep parameters in the dyslexic group. This suggests a 
reduced role of sleep in vocabulary consolidation in dyslexia, possibly as a 
consequence of lower levels of learning prior to sleep, and highlights how 
models of sleep-associated memory consolidation can be usefully informed by data 
from typical and atypical development.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12639
PMID: 29226513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12682. doi: 10.1111/desc.12682. Epub 2018 Jun 19.

Syntactical regularities of action sequences in the infant brain: when structure 
matters.

Maffongelli L(1), Antognini K(1), Daum MM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Throughout life, actions and language are inherent to social interactions. A 
long-standing research question in cognitive neuroscience concerns the 
interrelation between verbal and non-verbal forms of social interactions, that 
is, language and action. Perceiving how actions are performed and why they are 
performed in a certain way is crucial for the observer to anticipate the actor's 
goal and to prepare an appropriate response. It is suggested that predicting 
upcoming events in a given action sequence can be compared to the way we process 
the language information flow. Goal-directed actions can be sequenced in small 
units, which are organized according to a hierarchical plan, resembling the 
hierarchical organization of language. Research on adults suggests that 
manipulating the action structure (i.e., action syntax) leads to analogous 
cortical signatures as a similar manipulation of a sentence structure (i.e., 
language syntax). Whereas in adults language and action knowledge are based on 
life-time experience, in infants both domains are still developing. The current 
study examined the neural processing of structural violations of observed 
goal-directed action sequences in infants at 6-7 months, using event-related 
potentials (ERPs). Results showed that a structural violation of the action 
sequence elicited bilateral frontal positivity effects. This suggests that 
infants capture structural regularities, and it adds a crucial element to the 
understanding of general syntactic regularities and their violation from an 
ontogenetic perspective.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12682
PMID: 29920867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Dev Sci. 2019 Mar;22(2):e12734. doi: 10.1111/desc.12734. Epub 2018 Sep 10.

Body mass index, peer victimization, and body dissatisfaction across 7 years of 
childhood and adolescence: Evidence of moderated and mediated pathways.

Lee KS(1), Vaillancourt T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Counselling Psychology, Faculty of Education, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada.
(2)School of Psychology, Faculty of Social Sciences, University of Ottawa, 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Numerous studies have reported that children and adolescents who are overweight 
are more likely to get bullied, yet the literature is replete with 
methodological limitations. We examined the transactional associations between 
peer victimization and body mass index (BMI), considering potential mediating 
(body dissatisfaction) and moderating (biological sex) factors. Participants 
(n = 631) came from the McMaster Teen Study, where students were assessed 
annually between Grades 5-11, approximately half were girls (53.9%), and the 
majority were white (76.4%). Peer victimization (from Grade 5) and body 
dissatisfaction (from Grade 6) were self-reported by students, while parents 
reported their child's height and weight (from Grade 5). Cascade models were 
built up sequentially using path analysis across 2-year increments (Grades 5, 7, 
9, and 11). The final model had excellent fit to the data (χ2  = 73.961, 
df = 66, p = 0.234). Grade 5 peer victimization had a direct effect on BMI 
across a 2-year period in girls (b = 0.59, SE = 0.21, p = 0.005) and boys 
(b = 0.82, SE = 0.30, p = 0.006), and an indirect effect on BMI via body 
dissatisfaction across a 4-year period (b = 0.074, 95% CI = 0.012-0.152, 
p = 0.036). At no point did BMI directly increase risk for peer victimization, 
yet there were indirect effects via body dissatisfaction among girls but not 
boys. Peer victimization and body dissatisfaction were proximally and 
longitudinally related at every time point and there was a transactional 
association in late-adolescence among girls but not boys. Targeting modifiable 
factors in the social (peer victimization) and psychological (body 
dissatisfaction) domains may limit accelerated weight gain and the health risks 
associated with excess adiposity.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12734
PMID: 30192039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12667. doi: 10.1111/desc.12667. Epub 2018 Apr 6.

Infants' visual sustained attention is higher during joint play than solo play: 
is this due to increased endogenous attention control or exogenous stimulus 
capture?

Wass SV(1), Clackson K(2), Georgieva SD(2), Brightman L(2), Nutbrown R(2), Leong 
V(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of East London, London, UK.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Division of Psychology, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.

Previous research has suggested that when a social partner, such as a parent, 
pays attention to an object, this increases the attention that infants pay to 
that object during spontaneous, naturalistic play. There are two contrasting 
reasons why this might be: first, social context may influence increases in 
infants' endogenous (voluntary) attention control; second, social settings may 
offer increased opportunities for exogenous attentional capture. To 
differentiate these possibilities, we compared 12-month-old infants' 
naturalistic attention patterns in two settings: Solo Play and Joint Play with a 
social partner (the parent). Consistent with previous research, we found that 
infants' look durations toward play objects were longer during Joint Play, and 
that moments of inattentiveness were fewer, and shorter. Follow-up analyses, 
conducted to differentiate the two above-proposed hypotheses, were more 
consistent with the latter hypothesis. We found that infants' rate of change of 
attentiveness was faster during Joint Play than Solo Play, suggesting that 
internal attention factors, such as attentional inertia, may influence looking 
behaviour less during Joint Play. We also found that adults' attention 
forwards-predicted infants' subsequent attention more than vice versa, 
suggesting that adults' behaviour may drive infants' behaviour. Finally, we 
found that mutual gaze did not directly facilitate infant attentiveness. 
Overall, our results suggest that infants spend more time attending to objects 
during Joint Play than Solo Play, but that these differences are more likely 
attributable to increased exogenous attentional scaffolding from the parent 
during social play, rather than to increased endogenous attention control from 
the infant.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12667
PMID: 29624833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12603. doi: 10.1111/desc.12603. Epub 2017 Sep 15.

Dramatic pretend play games uniquely improve emotional control in young 
children.

Goldstein TR(1), Lerner MD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA.

Pretense is a naturally occurring, apparently universal activity for typically 
developing children. Yet its function and effects remain unclear. One theorized 
possibility is that pretense activities, such as dramatic pretend play games, 
are a possible causal path to improve children's emotional development. Social 
and emotional skills, particularly emotional control, are critically important 
for social development, as well as academic performance and later life success. 
However, the study of such approaches has been criticized for potential bias and 
lack of rigor, precluding the ability to make strong causal claims. We conducted 
a randomized, component control (dismantling) trial of dramatic pretend play 
games with a low-SES group of 4-year-old children (N = 97) to test whether such 
practice yields generalized improvements in multiple social and emotional 
outcomes. We found specific effects of dramatic play games only on emotional 
self-control. Results suggest that dramatic pretend play games involving 
physicalizing emotional states and traits, pretending to be animals and human 
characters, and engaging in pretend scenarios in a small group may improve 
children's emotional control. These findings have implications for the function 
of pretense and design of interventions to improve emotional control in typical 
and atypical populations. Further, they provide support for the unique role of 
dramatic pretend play games for young children, particularly those from 
low-income backgrounds. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at: 
https://youtu.be/2GVNcWKRHPk.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12603
PMID: 28913920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Dev Sci. 2017 Nov;20(6):10.1111/desc.12461. doi: 10.1111/desc.12461. Epub 2017 
Jan 30.

Positive parenting predicts cortisol functioning six years later in young 
adults.

Shirtcliff EA(1), Skinner ML(2), Obasi EM(3), Haggerty KP(2).

Author information:
(1)Human Development Family Studies, Iowa State University, USA.
(2)Social Development Research Group, University of Washington-Seattle, USA.
(3)Department of Educational Psychology, University of Houston, USA.

Research which indicates that adverse experiences influence 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis functioning illustrates the social 
environment 'getting under the skin'. The present study extended this literature 
by examining whether positive social forces within the caregiving environment 
can also impact cortisol functioning. We conducted a prospective investigation 
of over 300 youth, half of whom were White and half were Black. Attachment, 
bonding and parental rewards for positive behaviors were observed or reported by 
the youth as an 8th grader. Twelve repeated measures of salivary cortisol were 
examined six years later when youth were young adults (mean age 20). Race 
differences were explored. Stronger attachment, bonding and teen-reported 
positive parenting were predictive of high waking cortisol and steeper diurnal 
slopes six years later. This effect was nonlinear and additive, such that youth 
whose social contexts were characterized by the strongest attachment, bonding 
and rewarding parental relationships had the highest waking cortisol. When 
effects were moderated by race, findings were such that links of positive 
parenting with HPA functioning were more consistent for White than Black youth. 
Findings suggest that positive aspects of the caregiving environment can also 
'get under the skin' and these effects are additive across a range of caregiving 
indices. These findings dovetail with an emerging literature on the powerful 
role of social support for shaping the body's stress response system and are 
interpreted as consistent with the Adaptive Calibration Model which suggests 
that cortisol regulation can have adaptive significance. A video abstract of 
this article can be viewed at: https://youtu.be/8evHXpt_TXM.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12461
PMCID: PMC5689081
PMID: 28139051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12645. doi: 10.1111/desc.12645. Epub 2018 Jan 25.

Young children's non-numerical ordering ability at the start of formal education 
longitudinally predicts their symbolic number skills and academic achievement in 
maths.

O'Connor PA(1), Morsanyi K(1), McCormack T(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, UK.

Ordinality is a fundamental feature of numbers and recent studies have 
highlighted the role that number ordering abilities play in mathematical 
development (e.g., Lyons et al., ), as well as mature mathematical performance 
(e.g., Lyons & Beilock, ). The current study tested the novel hypothesis that 
non-numerical ordering ability, as measured by the ordering of familiar 
sequences of events, also plays an important role in maths development. Ninety 
children were tested in their first school year and 87 were followed up at the 
end of their second school year, to test the hypothesis that ordinal processing, 
including the ordering of non-numerical materials, would be related to their 
maths skills both cross-sectionally and longitudinally. The results confirmed 
this hypothesis. Ordinal processing measures were significantly related to maths 
both cross-sectionally and longitudinally, and children's non-numerical ordering 
ability in their first year of school (as measured by order judgements for 
everyday events and the parents' report of their child's everyday ordering 
ability) was the strongest longitudinal predictor of maths one year later, when 
compared to several measures that are traditionally considered to be important 
predictors of early maths development. Children's everyday ordering ability, as 
reported by parents, also significantly predicted growth in formal maths ability 
between Year 1 and Year 2, although this was not the case for the event ordering 
task. The present study provides strong evidence that domain-general ordering 
abilities play an important role in the development of children's maths skills 
at the beginning of formal education.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12645
PMID: 29372580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12559. doi: 10.1111/desc.12559. Epub 2017 Mar 12.

Gaze-based rehearsal in children under 7: a developmental investigation of eye 
movements during a serial spatial memory task.

Morey CC(1), Mareva S(1), Lelonkiewicz JR(1), Chevalier N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

The emergence of strategic verbal rehearsal at around 7 years of age is widely 
considered a major milestone in descriptions of the development of short-term 
memory across childhood. Likewise, rehearsal is believed by many to be a crucial 
factor in explaining why memory improves with age. This apparent qualitative 
shift in mnemonic processes has also been characterized as a shift from passive 
visual to more active verbal mnemonic strategy use, but no investigation of the 
development of overt spatial rehearsal has informed this explanation. We 
measured serial spatial order reconstruction in adults and groups of children 
5-7 years old and 8-11 years old, while recording their eye movements. Children, 
particularly the youngest children, overtly fixated late-list spatial positions 
longer than adults, suggesting that younger children are less likely to engage 
in covert rehearsal during stimulus presentation than older children and adults. 
However, during retention the youngest children overtly fixated more of the 
to-be-remembered sequences than any other group, which is inconsistent with the 
idea that children do nothing to try to remember. Altogether, these data are 
inconsistent with the notion that children under 7 do not engage in any attempts 
to remember. They are most consistent with proposals that children's style of 
remembering shifts around age 7 from reactive cue-driven methods to proactive, 
covert methods, which may include cumulative rehearsal.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12559
PMID: 28295917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12612. doi: 10.1111/desc.12612. Epub 2017 Oct 22.

Children prenatally exposed to maternal anxiety devote more attentional 
resources to neutral pictures.

van den Heuvel MI(1), Henrichs J(2), Donkers FCL(3), Van den Bergh BRH(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Merrill Palmer Skillman Institute for Child and Family Development, Wayne 
State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
(2)Midwifery Science, AVAG, Amsterdam Public Health Research Institute, VU 
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Health Psychology, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Department of Welfare, Public Health and Family, Flemish Government, 
Brussels, Belgium.

Maternal anxiety during pregnancy can negatively affect fetal neurodevelopment, 
predisposing the offspring to a higher risk of behavioral and emotional problems 
later in life. The current study investigates the association between maternal 
anxiety during pregnancy and child affective picture processing using 
event-related brain potentials (ERPs). Mothers reported anxiety during the 
second trimester using the anxiety subscale of the Symptom Checklist (SCL-90). 
At age 4 years, child affective picture processing (N = 86) was measured by 
recording ERPs during viewing of neutral, pleasant, and unpleasant pictures 
selected from the International Affective Pictures System. The late positive 
potential (LPP)-an ERP component reflecting individual differences in affective 
processing-was used as child outcome. The expected positive association between 
maternal anxiety and LPP amplitude for unpleasant pictures was not found. 
Nevertheless, we found a positive association between maternal anxiety during 
pregnancy and LPP amplitudes for neutral pictures in the middle and late time 
window at anterior locations (all p < .05). These associations remained 
significant after adjusting for maternal postnatal anxiety and gestational age 
at birth and after FDR correction for multiple comparisons. Our study provides 
neurophysiological evidence that children prenatally exposed to higher maternal 
anxiety devote more attentional resources to neutral pictures, but not to 
unpleasant pictures. Possibly, these children show enhanced vigilance for threat 
when viewing neutral pictures. Although useful in dangerous environments, this 
enhanced vigilance may predispose children prenatally exposed to higher maternal 
anxiety to developing behavioral and/or emotional problems later in life. A 
video abstract of this article can be viewed at: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kEzYi6IS2HA.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12612
PMID: 29057552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12610. doi: 10.1111/desc.12610. Epub 2017 Sep 24.

Digital disruption? Maternal mobile device use is related to infant 
social-emotional functioning.

Myruski S(1)(2), Gulyayeva O(2)(3), Birk S(2), Pérez-Edgar K(4), Buss KA(4), 
Dennis-Tiwary TA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The Graduate Center, The City University of New 
York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Hunter College, The City University of New York, 
NY, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, St John's University, Queens, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
PA, USA.

Mobile device use has become increasingly prevalent, yet its impact on infant 
development remains largely unknown. When parents use mobile devices in front of 
infants, the parent is physically present but most likely distracted and 
unresponsive. Research using the classic Still Face Paradigm (SFP) suggests that 
parental withdrawal and unresponsiveness may have negative consequences for 
children's social-emotional development. In the present study, 50 infants aged 
7.20 to 23.60 months (M = 15.40, SD = 4.74) and their mothers completed a 
modified SFP. The SFP consisted of three phases: free play (FP; parent and 
infant play and interact), still face (SF; parent withdraws attention and 
becomes unresponsive), and reunion (RU; parent resumes normal interaction). The 
modified SFP incorporated mobile device use in the SF phase. Parents reported on 
their typical mobile device use and infant temperament. Consistent with the 
standard SFP, infants showed more negative affect and less positive affect 
during SF versus FP. Infants also showed more toy engagement and more engagement 
with mother during FP versus SF and RU. Infants showed the most social bids 
during SF and more room exploration in SF than RU. More frequent reported mobile 
device use was associated with less room exploration and positive affect during 
SF, and less recovery (i.e., engagement with mother, room exploration positive 
affect) during RU, even when controlling for individual differences in 
temperament. Findings suggest that the SFP represents a promising theoretical 
framework for understanding the impact of parent's mobile device use on infant 
social-emotional functioning and parent-infant interactions.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12610
PMCID: PMC5866735
PMID: 28944600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12634. doi: 10.1111/desc.12634. Epub 2017 Dec 17.

Children retain implicitly learned phonological sequences better than adults: a 
longitudinal study.

Smalle EHM(1)(2), Page MPA(3), Duyck W(4), Edwards M(1)(2), Szmalec A(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Psychological Sciences Research Institute, Université catholique de Louvain, 
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.
(2)Institute of Neuroscience, Université catholique de Louvain, 
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Hertfordshire, Hatfield, UK.
(4)Department of Experimental Psychology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.

Whereas adults often rely on explicit memory, children appear to excel in 
implicit memory, which plays an important role in the acquisition of various 
cognitive skills, such as those involved in language. The current study aimed to 
test the assertion of an age-dependent shift in implicit versus explicit 
learning within a theoretical framework that explains the link between implicit 
sequence memory and word-form acquisition, using the Hebb repetition paradigm. 
We conducted a one-year, multiple-session longitudinal study in which we 
presented auditory sequences of syllables, co-presented with pictures of aliens, 
for immediate serial recall by a group of children (8-9 years) and by an adult 
group. The repetition of one Hebb sequence was explicitly announced, while the 
repetition of another Hebb sequence was unannounced and, therefore, implicit. 
Despite their overall inferior recall performance, the children showed better 
offline retention of the implicit Hebb sequence, compared with adults who showed 
a significant decrement across the delays. Adults had gained more explicit 
knowledge of the implicit sequence than children, but this could not explain the 
age-dependent decline in the delayed memory for it. There was no significant 
age-effect for delayed memory of the explicit Hebb sequence, with both age 
groups showing retention. Overall performance by adults was positively 
correlated with measures of post-learning awareness. Performance by children was 
positively correlated with vocabulary knowledge. We conclude that children 
outperform adults in the retention over time of implicitly learned phonological 
sequences that will gradually consolidate into novel word-forms. The findings 
are discussed in the light of maturational differences for implicit versus 
explicit memory systems that also play a role in language acquisition. A video 
abstract of this article can be viewed at: https://youtu.be/G5nOfJB72t4.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12634
PMID: 29250874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12630. doi: 10.1111/desc.12630. Epub 2017 Nov 8.

Genetic and environmental links between motor activity level and attention 
problems in early childhood.

Saudino KJ(1), Wang M(1), Flom M(1), Asherson P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Boston University, Boston, 
MA, USA.
(2)Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Kings College, London, UK.

Cross-lagged biometric models were used to examine genetic and environmental 
links between actigraph-assessed motor activity level (AL) and parent-rated 
attention problems (AP) in 314 same-sex twin pairs (MZ = 145, DZ = 169) at ages 
2 and 3 years. At both ages, genetic correlations between AL and AP were 
moderate (ra2 = .35; ra3 = .39) indicating both overlap and specificity in 
genetic effects across the two domains. Within- and across-age phenotypic 
associations between AL and AP were entirely due to overlapping genetic 
influences. There was a unidirectional effect of AL at age 2 predicting later 
AP. For AP, genetic and environmental influences from age 2 were transmitted to 
age 3 via stability effects and from AL. For AL, across-age effects were 
transmitted only via stability. These results suggest that overactivity in late 
infancy may impact the later development of problems related to inattention, and 
that genetic factors explain the association between the two domains.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12630
PMCID: PMC6693496
PMID: 29119648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan 17:e13082. doi: 10.1111/desc.13082. Online ahead of print.

Dimensions of the language environment in infancy and symptoms of 
psychopathology in toddlerhood.

King LS(1), Querdasi FR(1), Humphreys KL(2), Gotlib IH(1).

Author information:
(1)Stanford University, Department of Psychology, Stanford, CA, 94305, USA.
(2)Vanderbilt University, Department of Psychology and Human Development, 
Nashville, TN, 37235, USA.

The quality of the early environment influences the development of 
psychopathology. Children who are deprived of sufficient environmental 
enrichment in infancy may be at higher risk for developing symptoms of 
psychopathology in toddlerhood. In this study, we investigated the prospective 
association between naturalistic measures of adult language input obtained 
through passive monitoring of infants' daily environments and emerging 
psychopathology in toddlerhood. In a sample of 100 mothers and their infants 
recruited from the community (mean age [range] = 6.73 [5-9] months), we used the 
Language ENvironment Analysis (LENA) system to measure multiple dimensions of 
infants' language environments, including both the quantity and consistency of 
adult speech and conversational turns in infants' daily lives as well as the 
quantity of infant vocalizations. Subsequently, during toddlerhood (mean age 
[range] = 18.29 [17-21] months), mothers reported on their children's symptoms 
of psychopathology. Infants who experienced more consistent adult speech and 
conversational turns had lower symptoms of psychopathology in toddlerhood, 
independent of negative emotionality in infancy, maternal depressive symptoms, 
and laboratory-based measures of maternal sensitivity. These findings have 
implications for the measurement of environmental factors that may confer risk 
and resilience to emerging psychopathology.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13082
PMID: 33455064


429. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12557. doi: 10.1111/desc.12557. Epub 2017 Mar 22.

The development of bodily self-consciousness: changing responses to the Full 
Body Illusion in childhood.

Cowie D(1), McKenna A(2), Bremner AJ(2), Aspell JE(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Durham University, Durham, UK.
(2)Sensorimotor Development Research Unit, Department of Psychology, Goldsmiths, 
University of London, UK.
(3)Department of Psychology, Anglia Ruskin University, Cambridge, UK.

The present work investigates the development of bodily self-consciousness and 
its relation to multisensory bodily information, by measuring for the first time 
the development of responses to the full body illusion in childhood. We tested 
three age groups of children: 6- to 7-year-olds (n = 28); 8- to 9-year-olds 
(n = 21); 10- to 11-year-olds (n = 19), and a group of adults (n = 31). Each 
participant wore a head-mounted display (HMD) which displayed a view from a 
video camera positioned 2 metres behind their own back. Thus, they could view a 
virtual body from behind. We manipulated visuo-tactile synchrony by showing the 
participants a view of their virtual back being stroked with a stick at the same 
time and same place as their real back (synchronous condition), or at different 
times and places (asynchronous condition). After each period of stroking, we 
measured three aspects of bodily self-consciousness: drift in perceived 
self-location, self-identification with the virtual body, and touch referral to 
the virtual body. Results show that self-identification with the virtual body 
was significantly stronger in the synchronous condition than in the asynchronous 
condition even in the youngest group tested; however, the size of this effect 
increased with age. Touch referral to the virtual body was greater in the 
synchronous condition than in the asynchronous condition only for 10- to 
11-year-olds and adults. Drift in perceived self-location was greater in the 
synchronous condition than in the asynchronous condition only for adults. Thus, 
the youngest age tested can self-identify with a virtual body, but the links 
between multisensory signals and bodily self-consciousness develop significantly 
across childhood. This suggests a long period of development of the bodily self 
and exciting potential for the use of virtual reality technologies with 
children.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12557
PMID: 28326654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12636. doi: 10.1111/desc.12636. Epub 2017 Nov 15.

Reverse production effect: children recognize novel words better when they are 
heard rather than produced.

Zamuner TS(1), Strahm S(1), Morin-Lessard E(2), Page MPA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Linguistics, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology, Concordia University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Hertfordshire, Hatfield, 
Hertfordshire, UK.

This research investigates the effect of production on 4.5- to 6-year-old 
children's recognition of newly learned words. In Experiment 1, children were 
taught four novel words in a produced or heard training condition during a brief 
training phase. In Experiment 2, children were taught eight novel words, and 
this time training condition was in a blocked design. Immediately after 
training, children were tested on their recognition of the trained novel words 
using a preferential looking paradigm. In both experiments, children recognized 
novel words that were produced and heard during training, but demonstrated 
better recognition for items that were heard. These findings are opposite to 
previous results reported in the literature with adults and children. Our 
results show that benefits of speech production for word learning are dependent 
on factors such as task complexity and the developmental stage of the learner.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12636
PMID: 29143412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Dev Sci. 2018 Jan;21(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12490. Epub 2016 Nov 22.

Attention allocation towards own face is pronounced during middle adolescence: 
an eye-tracking study.

Doi H(1), Shinohara K(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University, Japan.

Increased interest in the self has long been deemed to be one of the most 
peculiar characteristics of adolescence. On the basis of this, we conjectured 
that attentiveness towards self-relevant information, especially one's own face, 
becomes more pronounced during the middle adolescence. The present study tested 
this hypothesis by comparing the pattern of visuospatial attention allocation to 
their own face among early, middle and late adolescent males using an 
eye-tracking methodology. The results have shown a clear pattern of increased 
attention allocation towards their own face over a close friend's and a 
stranger's face in middle adolescents, but fixation durations on their own and a 
friend's face did not differ from each other in early and late adolescents. In 
addition, middle adolescents showed higher public self-consciousness and a lower 
level of self-esteem than early and late adolescents, respectively. These 
results indicate that attention allocation towards one's own face is more 
pronounced during middle adolescence, and is associated with increased interest 
in their own attributes.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12490
PMID: 27873384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):933-946. doi: 10.1111/desc.12348. Epub 2015 Sep 9.

Emotional experience in music fosters 18-month-olds' emotion-action 
understanding: a training study.

Siu TS(1), Cheung H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(2)Department of Psychology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. 
hcheung@psy.cuhk.edu.hk.

We examine whether emotional experiences induced via music-making promote 
infants' use of emotional cues to predict others' action. Fifteen-month-olds 
were randomly assigned to participate in interactive emotion training either 
with or without musical engagement for three months. Both groups were then 
re-tested with two violation-of-expectation paradigms respectively assessing 
their sensitivity to some expressive features in music and understanding of the 
link between emotion and behaviour in simple action sequences. The infants who 
had participated in music, but not those who had not, were surprised by 
music-face inconsistent displays and were able to interpret an agent's action as 
guided by her expressed emotion. The findings suggest a privileged role of 
musical experience in prompting infants to form emotional representations, which 
support their understanding of the association between affective states and 
action.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12348
PMID: 26355193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12537. Epub 2017 Feb 3.

Older but not younger infants associate own-race faces with happy music and 
other-race faces with sad music.

Xiao NG(1), Quinn PC(2), Liu S(3), Ge L(3)(4), Pascalis O(5), Lee K(1).

Author information:
(1)Dr Eric Jackman Institute of Child Study, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Delaware, 
Newark, USA.
(3)Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou, China.
(4)Center for Psychological Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(5)LPNC - Université Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble, France.

We used a novel intermodal association task to examine whether infants associate 
own- and other-race faces with music of different emotional valences. Three- to 
9-month-olds saw a series of neutral own- or other-race faces paired with happy 
or sad musical excerpts. Three- to 6-month-olds did not show any specific 
association between face race and music. At 9 months, however, infants looked 
longer at own-race faces paired with happy music than at own-race faces paired 
with sad music. Nine-month-olds also looked longer at other-race faces paired 
with sad music than at other-race faces paired with happy music. These results 
indicate that infants with nearly exclusive own-race face experience develop 
associations between face race and music emotional valence in the first year of 
life. The potential implications of such associations for developing racial 
biases in early childhood are discussed.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12537
PMID: 28156026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12628. doi: 10.1111/desc.12628. Epub 2017 Dec 11.

Using facial muscular movements to understand young children's emotion 
regulation and concurrent neural activation.

Grabell AS(1)(2), Huppert TJ(3), Fishburn FA(2), Li Y(4), Jones HM(2), Wilett 
AE(2), Bemis LM(2), Perlman SB(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Massachusetts, 
Amherst, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Radiology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(4)College of Preschool Education Nanjing Xiaozhuang University Nanjing, 
Jiangsu, China.

Individual differences in young children's frustration responses set the stage 
for myriad developmental outcomes and represent an area of intense empirical 
interest. Emotion regulation is hypothesized to comprise the interplay of 
complex behaviors, such as facial expressions, and activation of concurrent 
underlying neural systems. At present, however, the literature has mostly 
examined children's observed emotion regulation behaviors and assumed underlying 
brain activation through separate investigations, resulting in theoretical gaps 
in our understanding of how children regulate emotion in vivo. Our goal was to 
elucidate links between young children's emotion regulation-related neural 
activation, facial muscular movements, and parent-rated temperamental emotion 
regulation. Sixty-five children (age 3-7) completed a frustration-inducing 
computer task while lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC) activation and concurrent 
facial expressions were recorded. Negative facial expressions with eye 
constriction were inversely associated with both parent-rated temperamental 
emotion regulation and concurrent LPFC activation. Moreover, we found evidence 
that positive expressions with eye constriction during frustration may be 
associated with stronger LPFC activation. Results suggest a correspondence 
between facial expressions and LPFC activation that may explicate how children 
regulate emotion in real time.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12628
PMCID: PMC5995650
PMID: 29226482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author Note Drs. Grabell, Barker, Huppert, and 
Perlman, and Ms. Li, Jones, Wilett, and Bemis report no competing interests.


435. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12540. Epub 2017 May 21.

Ensemble coding of faces occurs in children and develops dissociably from coding 
of individual faces.

Rhodes G(1), Neumann M(1), Ewing L(1)(2), Bank S(1), Read A(1), Engfors LM(1), 
Emiechel R(1), Palermo R(1).

Author information:
(1)ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders, School of 
Psychology, University of Western Australia, Australia.
(2)School of Psychology, University of East Anglia, UK.

Ensemble coding allows adults to access useful information about average 
properties of groups, sometimes even in the absence of detailed representations 
of individual group members. This form of coding may emerge early in development 
with initial reports of ensemble coding for simple properties (size, numerosity) 
in young children and even infants. Here we demonstrate that ensemble coding of 
faces, which provides information about average properties of social groups, is 
already present in 6-8-year-old children. This access to average information 
increases with age from 6 to 18 years and its development is dissociable from 
age-related improvements in the coding of individual face identities. This 
dissociation provides the first direct evidence that distinct processes underlie 
ensemble and individual coding of face identity, evidence that has been lacking 
from adult studies. More generally, our results add to the emerging evidence for 
impressively mature sensitivity to statistical properties of the visual 
environment in children. They indicate that children have access to gist 
information about social groups that may facilitate adaptive social behaviour.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12540
PMID: 28544105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12570. doi: 10.1111/desc.12570. Epub 2017 May 18.

The development of cognitive empathy and concern in preschool children: A 
behavioral neuroscience investigation.

Decety J(1), Meidenbauer KL(1), Cowell JM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)The Child Neurosuite, Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, 
Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin Green Bay, Wisconsin, USA.

This developmental neuroscience study examined the electrophysiological 
responses (EEG and ERPs) associated with perspective taking and empathic concern 
in preschool children, as well as their relation to parental empathy 
dispositions and children's own prosocial behavior. Consistent with a body of 
previous studies using stimuli depicting somatic pain in both children and 
adults, larger early (~200 ms) ERPs were identified when perceiving painful 
versus neutral stimuli. In the slow wave window (~800 ms), a significant 
interaction of empathy condition and stimulus type was driven by a greater 
difference between painful and neutral images in the empathic concern condition. 
Across early development, children exhibited enhanced N2 to pain when engaging 
in empathic concern. Greater pain-elicited N2 responses in the cognitive empathy 
condition also related to parent dispositional empathy. Children's own prosocial 
behavior was predicted by several individual differences in neural function, 
including larger early LPP responses during cognitive empathy and greater 
differentiation in late LPP and slow wave responses to empathic concern versus 
affective perspective taking. Left frontal activation (greater alpha 
suppression) while engaging in affective perspective taking was also related to 
higher levels of parent cognitive empathy. Together, this multilevel analysis 
demonstrates the important distinction between facets of empathy in children; 
the value of examining neurobehavioral processes in development. It provides 
provoking links between children's neural functioning and parental dispositions 
in early development.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12570
PMID: 28523733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Dev Sci. 2017 Jul;20(4). doi: 10.1111/desc.12470. Epub 2016 Nov 4.

Measuring the speed of newborn object recognition in controlled visual worlds.

Wood JN(1), Wood SMW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, USA.

How long does it take for a newborn to recognize an object? Adults can recognize 
objects rapidly, but measuring object recognition speed in newborns has not 
previously been possible. Here we introduce an automated controlled-rearing 
method for measuring the speed of newborn object recognition in controlled 
visual worlds. We raised newborn chicks (Gallus gallus) in strictly controlled 
environments that contained no objects other than a single virtual object, and 
then measured the speed at which the chicks could recognize that object from 
familiar and novel viewpoints. The chicks were able to recognize the object 
rapidly, at presentation rates of 125 ms per image. Further, recognition speed 
was equally fast whether the object was presented from familiar viewpoints or 
novel viewpoints (30° and 60° azimuth rotations). Thus, newborn chicks can 
recognize objects across novel viewpoints within a fraction of a second. These 
results demonstrate that newborns are capable of both rapid and invariant object 
recognition at the onset of vision.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12470
PMID: 28593689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12544. Epub 2017 Feb 21.

Children remember words from ignorant speakers but do not attach meaning: 
evidence from event-related potentials.

Mangardich H(1), Sabbagh MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Queen's University at Kingston, Kingston, Ontario, 
Canada.

Although we know much about the conditions under which children demonstrate 
selective social learning, we have a limited understanding of the cognitive 
mechanisms by which children's selectivity manifests. Here, we report findings 
from a brain electrophysiological (ERP) study designed to determine the extent 
to which words presented by ignorant speakers were later both familiar to 
children and associated with semantic meaning. Forty-eight children (mean 
age = 6.5 years) first experienced novel word training from either a 
knowledgeable or an ignorant speaker. Children's ERPs were subsequently recorded 
as they heard a recording of the speaker using the novel word, followed by a 
picture of either the object the word was paired with during training 
(congruent) or a distractor object that was also present during training 
(incongruent). Children trained by a knowledgeable speaker showed both N200 and 
N400 effects to the incongruent word-referent pairings, thereby suggesting that 
the novel words were both familiar and bore a semantic association. In contrast, 
children trained by an ignorant speaker demonstrated only the N200 effect, 
thereby suggesting that the word-referent links were familiar, but not 
associated with semantic meaning. These findings provide evidence that selective 
word learning involves the disruption of processes specifically associated with 
semantic consolidation of word learning events.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12544
PMID: 28224687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2):e12553. doi: 10.1111/desc.12553. Epub 2017 May 12.

Changing minds: Children's inferences about third party belief revision.

Magid RW(1), Yan P(1)(2), Siegel MH(1), Tenenbaum JB(1), Schulz LE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Statistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

By the age of 5, children explicitly represent that agents can have both true 
and false beliefs based on epistemic access to information (e.g., Wellman, 
Cross, & Watson, 2001). Children also begin to understand that agents can view 
identical evidence and draw different inferences from it (e.g., Carpendale & 
Chandler, 1996). However, much less is known about when, and under what 
conditions, children expect other agents to change their minds. Here, inspired 
by formal ideal observer models of learning, we investigate children's 
expectations of the dynamics that underlie third parties' belief revision. We 
introduce an agent who has prior beliefs about the location of a population of 
toys and then observes evidence that, from an ideal observer perspective, either 
does, or does not justify revising those beliefs. We show that children's 
inferences on behalf of third parties are consistent with the ideal observer 
perspective, but not with a number of alternative possibilities, including that 
children expect other agents to be influenced only by their prior beliefs, only 
by the sampling process, or only by the observed data. Rather, children 
integrate all three factors in determining how and when agents will update their 
beliefs from evidence.

© 2017 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12553
PMCID: PMC5888193
PMID: 28497524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12565. doi: 10.1111/desc.12565. Epub 2017 Jun 20.

A neural network model for development of reaching and pointing based on the 
interaction of forward and inverse transformations.

Takemura N(1), Inui T(1), Fukui T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Intelligence Science and Technology, Graduate School of 
Informatics, Kyoto University, Japan.

Pointing is one of the communicative actions that infants acquire during their 
first year of life. Based on a hypothesis that early pointing is triggered by 
emergent reaching behavior toward objects placed at out-of-reach distances, we 
proposed a neural network model that acquires reaching without explicit 
representation of 'targets'. The proposed model controls a two-joint arm in a 
horizontal plane, and it learns a loop of internal forward and inverse 
transformations; the former predicts the visual feedback of hand position and 
the latter generates motor commands from the visual input through random 
generation of the motor commands. In the proposed model, the motor output and 
visual input were represented by broadly tuned neural units. Even though 
explicit 'targets' were not presented during learning, the simulation 
successfully generated reaching toward visually presented objects at 
within-reach and out-of-reach distances.

© 2017 The Authors Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12565
PMCID: PMC5947301
PMID: 28635049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):892-900. doi: 10.1111/desc.12335. Epub 2015 Jul 31.

Delayed Match Retrieval: a novel anticipation-based visual working memory 
paradigm.

Kaldy Z(1), Guillory SB(2), Blaser E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts Boston, USA. 
zsuzsa.kaldy@umb.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts Boston, USA.

We tested 8- and 10-month-old infants' visual working memory (VWM) for 
object-location bindings - what is where - with a novel paradigm, Delayed Match 
Retrieval, that measured infants' anticipatory gaze responses (using a Tobii 
T120 eye tracker). In an inversion of Delayed-Match-to-Sample tasks and with 
inspiration from the game Memory, in test trials, three face-down virtual 
'cards' were presented. Two flipped over sequentially (revealing, e.g. a swirl 
pattern and then a star), and then flipped back face-down. Next, the third card 
was flipped to reveal a match (e.g. a star) to one of the previously seen, now 
face-down cards. If infants looked to the location where the (now face-down) 
matching card had been shown, this was coded as a correct response. To encourage 
anticipatory looks, infants subsequently received a reward (a brief, engaging 
animation) presented at that location. Ten-month-old infants performed 
significantly above chance, showing that their VWM could hold object-location 
information for the two cards. Overall, 8-month-olds' performance was at chance, 
but they showed a robust learning trend. These results corroborate previous 
findings (Kaldy & Leslie, 2005; Oakes, Ross-Sheehy & Luck, 2006) and point to 
rapid development of VWM for object-location bindings. However, compared to 
previous paradigms that measure passive gaze responses to novelty, this paradigm 
presents a more challenging, ecologically relevant test of VWM, as it measures 
the ability to make online predictions and actively localize objects based on 
VWM. In addition, this paradigm can be readily scaled up to test toddlers or 
older children without significant modification.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12335
PMCID: PMC4733613
PMID: 26234951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Dev Sci. 2017 Nov;20(6):10.1111/desc.12485. doi: 10.1111/desc.12485. Epub 2016 
Nov 4.

Seeing behind the surface: communicative demonstration boosts category 
disambiguation in 12-month-olds.

Kovács ÁM(1), Téglás E(1), Gergely G(1), Csibra G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Development Center, Department of Cognitive Science, Central 
European University, Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London, UK.

In their first years, infants acquire an incredible amount of information 
regarding the objects present in their environment. While often it is not clear 
what specific information should be prioritized in encoding from the many 
characteristics of an object, different types of object representations 
facilitate different types of generalizations. We tested the hypotheses that 
1-year-old infants distinctively represent familiar objects as exemplars of 
their kind, and that ostensive communication plays a role in determining kind 
membership for ambiguous objects. In the training phase of our experiment, 
infants were exposed to movies displaying an agent sorting objects from two 
categories (cups and plates) into two locations (left or right). Afterwards, 
different groups of infants saw either an ostensive or a non-ostensive 
demonstration performed by the agent, revealing that a new object that looked 
like a plate can be transformed into a cup. A third group of infants experienced 
no demonstration regarding the new object. During test, infants were presented 
with the ambiguous object in the plate format, and we measured generalization by 
coding anticipatory looks to the plate or the cup side. While infants looked 
equally often towards the two sides when the demonstration was non-ostensive, 
and more often to the plate side when there was no demonstration, they performed 
more anticipatory eye movements to the cup side when the demonstration was 
ostensive. Thus, ostensive demonstration likely highlighted the hidden 
dispositional properties of the target object as kind-relevant, guiding infants' 
categorization of the foldable cup as a cup, despite it looking like a plate. 
These results suggest that infants likely encode familiar objects as exemplars 
of their kind and that ostensive communication can play a crucial role in 
disambiguating what kind an object belongs to, even when this requires 
disregarding salient surface features.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12485
PMCID: PMC5669476
PMID: 29076269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Dev Sci. 2017 Jan;20(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12482. Epub 2016 Nov 23.

A bilingual advantage in 54-month-olds' use of referential cues in fast mapping.

Yow WQ(1), Li X(1), Lam S(2), Gliga T(3), Chong YS(2)(4)(5), Kwek K(6), Broekman 
BF(2)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore.
(2)Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences, Singapore.
(3)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Birkbeck, University of London, 
UK.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, 
National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, National University Hospital, 
National University Health System, Singapore.
(6)KK Women's and Children's Hospital, Singapore.
(7)Department of Psychological Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, 
National University of Singapore.
(8)Department of Psychological Medicine, National University Hospital, National 
University Health System, Singapore.

Research has demonstrated a bilingual advantage in how young children use 
referential cues such as eye gaze and pointing gesture to locate an object or to 
categorize objects. This study investigated the use of referential cues (i.e. 
eye gaze) in fast mapping in three groups of children that differed in their 
language exposure. One hundred and seven 54-month-old children who were English 
monolinguals (n = 28), English-Mandarin bilinguals (n = 48), and 
English-Mandarin bilinguals with exposure to a third language (i.e. trilinguals, 
n = 31) were assessed with a word learning task using two types of test - a 
referent test and a mutual exclusivity test. During the task, following the gaze 
of an adult speaker was needed to be able to indicate the correct referent of a 
novel word at test. All three groups of children demonstrated successful word 
learning in explicit selection of and implicit looking time toward the target 
object during testing. However, bilingual and trilingual children outperformed 
their monolingual peers in both types of test when they were asked to explicitly 
select the correct objects. These findings suggest positive effects of 
bilingualism on children's use of referential cues in fast mapping.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12482
PMID: 27882635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12563. doi: 10.1111/desc.12563. Epub 2017 Apr 25.

Atypical inter-hemispheric communication correlates with altered motor 
inhibition during learning of a new bimanual coordination pattern in 
developmental coordination disorder.

Blais M(1), Amarantini D(1), Albaret JM(1), Chaix Y(1)(2), Tallet J(1).

Author information:
(1)ToNIC, Toulouse NeuroImaging Center, Université de Toulouse, Inserm, UPS, 
France.
(2)Hôpital des Enfants, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Toulouse, F-31059, 
Toulouse Cedex 9, France.

Impairment of motor learning skills in developmental coordination disorder (DCD) 
has been reported in several studies. Some hypotheses on neural mechanisms of 
motor learning deficits in DCD have emerged but, to date, brain-imaging 
investigations are scarce. The aim of the present study is to assess possible 
changes in communication between brain areas during practice of a new bimanual 
coordination task in teenagers with DCD (n = 10) compared to matched controls 
(n = 10). Accuracy, stability and number of mirror movements were computed as 
behavioural variables. Neural variables were assessed by electroencephalographic 
coherence analyses of intra-hemispheric and inter-hemispheric fronto-central 
electrodes. In both groups, accuracy of the new coordination increased 
concomitantly with right intra-hemispheric fronto-central coherence. Compared to 
typically developing teenagers, DCD teenagers presented learning difficulties 
expressed by less stability, no stabilization of the new coordination and a 
greater number of mirror movements despite practice. These measures correlated 
with reduced inter-hemispheric communication, even after practice of the new 
coordination. For the first time, these findings provide neuro-imaging evidence 
of a kind of inter-hemispheric 'disconnection' related to altered inhibition of 
mirror movements during motor learning in DCD.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12563
PMID: 28440058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Dev Sci. 2017 Nov;20(6). doi: 10.1111/desc.12476. Epub 2016 Oct 16.

Linking executive function skills and physiological challenge response: 
Piecewise growth curve modeling.

Obradović J(1), Finch JE(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Education, Stanford University, USA.

This study employed piecewise growth curve modeling to examine how children's 
executive function (EF) skills relate to different components of children's 
physiological response trajectory - initial arousal, reactivity, and recovery. 
The sample included 102 ethnically diverse kindergarteners, whose EF skills were 
measured using standard tasks and observer ratings. Physiological response was 
measured via changes in respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) in response to a 
laboratory socio-cognitive challenge. Children's cool and hot EF skills were 
differentially related to both linear and quadratic components of RSA response 
during the challenge. Greater hot EF skills and assessor report of EF skills 
during laboratory visit were related to quicker RSA recovery after the 
challenge. These findings demonstrate that children's physiological response is 
a dynamic process that encompasses physiological recovery and relates to 
children's self-regulation abilities.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12476
PMID: 27748016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12596. doi: 10.1111/desc.12596. Epub 2017 Oct 19.

Instrumental learning and cognitive flexibility processes are impaired in 
children exposed to early life stress.

Harms MB(1), Shannon Bowen KE(1), Hanson JL(1), Pollak SD(1).

Author information:
(1)Deaprtment of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.

Children who experience severe early life stress show persistent deficits in 
many aspects of cognitive and social adaptation. Early stress might be 
associated with these broad changes in functioning because it impairs general 
learning mechanisms. To explore this possibility, we examined whether 
individuals who experienced abusive caregiving in childhood had difficulties 
with instrumental learning and/or cognitive flexibility as adolescents. 
Fifty-three 14-17-year-old adolescents (31 exposed to high levels of childhood 
stress, 22 control) completed an fMRI task that required them to first learn 
associations in the environment and then update those pairings. Adolescents with 
histories of early life stress eventually learned to pair stimuli with both 
positive and negative outcomes, but did so more slowly than their peers. 
Furthermore, these stress-exposed adolescents showed markedly impaired cognitive 
flexibility; they were less able than their peers to update those pairings when 
the contingencies changed. These learning problems were reflected in abnormal 
activity in learning- and attention-related brain circuitry. Both altered 
patterns of learning and neural activation were associated with the severity of 
lifetime stress that the adolescents had experienced. Taken together, the 
results of this experiment suggest that basic learning processes are impaired in 
adolescents exposed to early life stress. These general learning mechanisms may 
help explain the emergence of social problems observed in these individuals.

© 2017 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12596
PMCID: PMC5908766
PMID: 29052307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12608. doi: 10.1111/desc.12608. Epub 2017 Nov 8.

Reduced neural responses to vocal fear: a potential biomarker for 
callous-uncaring traits in early childhood.

Hoyniak CP(1), Bates JE(1), Petersen IT(2), Yang CL(3), Darcy I(3), Fontaine 
NMG(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 
Bloomington, IN, USA.
(2)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA, USA.
(3)Department of Second Language Studies, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, 
USA.
(4)School of Criminology, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Callous-unemotional (CU) traits are characterized by a lack of guilt 
and empathy, and low responsiveness to distress and fear in others. Children 
with CU traits are at-risk for engaging in early and persistent conduct 
problems. Individuals showing CU traits have been shown to have reduced neural 
responses to others' distress (e.g., fear). However, the neural components of 
distress responses in children with CU traits have not been investigated in 
early childhood. In the current study, we examined neural responses that 
underlie the processing of emotionally valenced vocal stimuli using the 
event-related potential technique in a group of preschoolers.
METHOD: Participants between 2 and 5 years old took part in an auditory oddball 
task containing English-based pseudowords spoken with either a fearful, happy, 
or a neutral prosody while electroencephalography data were collected. The 
mismatch negativity (MMN) component, an index of the automatic detection of 
deviant stimuli within a series of stimuli, was examined in association with two 
dimensions of CU traits (i.e., callousness-uncaring and unemotional dimensions) 
reported by primary caregivers.
RESULTS: Findings suggest that the callousness-uncaring dimension of CU traits 
in early childhood is associated with reduced responses to fearful vocal 
stimuli.
CONCLUSIONS: Reduced neural responses to vocal fear could be a biomarker for 
callous-uncaring traits in early childhood. These findings are relevant for 
clinicians and researchers attempting to identify risk factors for early 
callous-uncaring traits.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12608
PMCID: PMC5940591
PMID: 29119657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: None.


448. Dev Sci. 2019 May;22(3):e12767. doi: 10.1111/desc.12767. Epub 2018 Nov 25.

Word comprehension mediates the link between gesture and word production: 
Examining language development in infant siblings of children with autism 
spectrum disorder.

Roemer EJ(1), West KL(1), Northrup JB(1), Iverson JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

Children's gesture production precedes and predicts language development, but 
the pathways linking these domains are unclear. It is possible that gesture 
production assists in children's developing word comprehension, which in turn 
supports expressive vocabulary acquisition. The present study examines this 
mediation pathway in a population with variability in early communicative 
abilities-the younger siblings of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD; 
high-risk infants, HR). Participants included 92 HR infants and 28 infants at 
low risk (LR) for ASD. A primary caregiver completed the MacArthur-Bates 
Communicative Development Inventory (Fenson, et al., 1993) at 12, 14, and 
18 months, and HR infants received a diagnostic evaluation for ASD at 36 months. 
Word comprehension at 14 months mediated the relationship between 12-month 
gesture and 18-month word production in LR and HR infants (ab = 0.263; 
p < 0.01). For LR infants and HR infants with no diagnosis or language delay, 
gesture was strongly associated with word comprehension (as = 0.666; 0.646; 
0.561; ps < 0.01). However, this relationship did not hold for infants later 
diagnosed with ASD (a = 0.073; p = 0.840). This finding adds to a growing 
literature suggesting that children with ASD learn language differently. 
Furthermore, this study provides an initial step toward testing the 
developmental pathways by which infants transition from early actions and 
gestures to expressive language.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12767
PMCID: PMC6470015
PMID: 30350906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.


449. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12602. doi: 10.1111/desc.12602. Epub 2017 Sep 15.

Changes in frontal and posterior cortical activity underlie the early emergence 
of executive function.

Buss AT(1), Spencer JP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA.
(2)School of Psychology, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK.

Executive function (EF) is a key cognitive process that emerges in early 
childhood and facilitates children's ability to control their own behavior. 
Individual differences in EF skills early in life are predictive of 
quality-of-life outcomes 30 years later (Moffitt et al., 2011). What changes in 
the brain give rise to this critical cognitive ability? Traditionally, frontal 
cortex growth is thought to underlie changes in cognitive control (Bunge & 
Zelazo, 2006; Moriguchi & Hiraki, 2009). However, more recent data highlight the 
importance of long-range cortical interactions between frontal and posterior 
brain regions. Here, we test the hypothesis that developmental changes in EF 
skills reflect changes in how posterior and frontal brain regions work together. 
Results show that children who fail a "hard" version of an EF task and who are 
thought to have an immature frontal cortex, show robust frontal activity in an 
"easy" version of the task. We show how this effect can arise via posterior 
brain regions that provide on-the-job training for the frontal cortex, 
effectively teaching the frontal cortex adaptive patterns of brain activity on 
"easy" EF tasks. In this case, frontal cortex activation can be seen as both the 
cause and the consequence of rule switching. Results also show that older 
children have differential posterior cortical activation on "easy" and "hard" 
tasks that reflects continued refinement of brain networks even in skilled 
children. These data set the stage for new training programs to foster the 
development of EF skills in at-risk children.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12602
PMID: 28913859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12625. doi: 10.1111/desc.12625. Epub 2017 Oct 27.

Human milk cortisol concentration predicts experimentally induced infant fear 
reactivity: moderation by infant sex.

Nolvi S(1), Uusitupa HM(1), Bridgett DJ(2), Pesonen H(1)(3), Aatsinki AK(1), 
Kataja EL(1)(4), Korja R(1)(4), Karlsson H(1)(5), Karlsson L(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)The FinnBrain Birth Cohort Study, Turku Brain and Mind Center, Institute of 
Clinical Medicine, University of Turku, Finland.
(2)Department of Psychology, Northern Illinois University, Chicago, USA.
(3)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Turku, Finland.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Turku, Finland.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Turku University Hospital and University of Turku, 
Finland.
(6)Department of Child Psychiatry, Turku University Hospital and University of 
Turku, Finland.

Little consideration has been given to the possibility of human infant 
development being shaped via lactocrine programming, and by breast milk cortisol 
levels specifically. Despite animal models indicating that glucocorticoid (GC) 
exposure via lactation might modify brain development and behavior, only one 
study has reported that milk cortisol levels were positively associated with 
infant negative affectivity, especially fearfulness and sadness-early emerging 
risk factors for internalizing difficulties such as anxiety. The aim of the 
current study was to investigate whether human milk cortisol is associated with 
mother-reported fearfulness and experimentally induced infant fear reactivity. 
Mother-infant dyads (n = 65) enrolled in the FinnBrain Cohort Study 
participated. Breast milk samples were obtained 2.5 months postpartum, and milk 
cortisol concentrations were ascertained using validated luminescence 
immunoassay methodology. Infant fear reactivity was assessed using maternal 
reports 6 months postpartum and in a laboratory 8 months postpartum. There was a 
significant interaction between infant sex and milk cortisol such that higher 
milk cortisol was related to higher infant fear reactivity in a laboratory 
setting in girls (β = 0.36, p = .04) but not in boys (β = -0.15, p = .40). Milk 
cortisol was not associated with mother-reported infant fearfulness. Results 
suggest that higher human milk cortisol concentrations are associated with 
elevated experimentally induced fear in infancy. Findings support lactocrine 
programming, and suggest that mothers may "communicate" vital information about 
stressful environments via cortisol contained in breast milk, shaping girls' 
early emotional reactivity.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12625
PMID: 29076272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Dev Sci. 2017 Nov;20(6). doi: 10.1111/desc.12464. Epub 2016 Oct 17.

The relationship between non-verbal systems of number and counting development: 
a neural signatures approach.

Hyde DC(1), Simon CE(1), Berteletti I(1), Mou Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA.

Two non-verbal cognitive systems, an approximate number system (ANS) for 
extracting the numerosity of a set and a parallel individuation (PI) system for 
distinguishing between individual items, are hypothesized to be foundational to 
symbolic number and mathematics abilities. However, the exact role of each 
remains unclear and highly debated. Here we used an individual differences 
approach to test for a relationship between the spontaneously evoked brain 
signatures (using event-related potentials) of PI and the ANS and initial 
development of symbolic number concepts in preschool children as displayed by 
counting. We observed that individual differences in the neural signatures of 
the PI system, but not the ANS, explained a unique portion of variance in 
counting proficiency after extensively controlling for general cognitive 
factors. These results suggest that differences in early attentional processing 
of objects between children are related to higher-level symbolic number concept 
development.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12464
PMID: 27747998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2):10.1111/desc.12523. doi: 10.1111/desc.12523. Epub 2017 
Feb 24.

Reach tracking reveals dissociable processes underlying inhibitory control in 5- 
to 10-year-olds and adults.

Erb CD(1), Moher J(2)(3), Song JH(3)(4), Sobel DM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, 
Greensboro, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Psychology Department, Williams College, Williamstown, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, and Psychological Sciences, Brown 
University, Providence, Rhode Island, USA.
(4)Brown Institute for Brain Science, Brown University, Rhode Island, USA.

Researchers have proposed that two processes featuring distinct types of 
inhibition support inhibitory control: a response threshold adjustment process 
involving the global inhibition of motor output and a conflict resolution 
process involving competitive inhibition among co-active response alternatives. 
To target the development of these processes, we measured the reaching behavior 
of 5- to 10-year-olds (Experiment 1) and adults (Experiment 2) as they performed 
an Eriksen flanker task. This method provided two key measures: initiation time 
(the time elapsed between stimulus onset and movement onset) and reach curvature 
(the degree to which a movement deviates from a direct path to the selected 
target). We suggest that initiation time reflects the response threshold 
adjustment process by indexing the degree of motoric stopping experienced before 
a movement is started, while reach curvature reflects the conflict resolution 
process by indexing the degree of co-activation between response alternatives 
over the course of a movement. Our results support this claim, revealing 
different patterns effects in initiation time and curvature, and divergent 
developmental trajectories between childhood and adulthood. These findings 
provide behavioral evidence for the dissociation between global and competitive 
inhibition, and offer new insight into the development of inhibitory control.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12523
PMCID: PMC6204061
PMID: 28233397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):1075-1086. doi: 10.1111/desc.12353. Epub 2015 Nov 5.

Action observation network in childhood: a comparative fMRI study with adults.

Biagi L(1), Cioni G(2)(3), Fogassi L(4), Guzzetta A(1), Sgandurra G(1), Tosetti 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Neuroscience and MR Unit, IRCCS Fondazione Stella 
Maris, Calambrone, Italy.
(2)Department of Developmental Neuroscience and MR Unit, IRCCS Fondazione Stella 
Maris, Calambrone, Italy. gcioni@fsm.unipi.it.
(3)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Italy. 
gcioni@fsm.unipi.it.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, University of Parma, and Istituto Italiano di 
Tecnologia (RTM), Parma, Italy.

Very little is known about the action observation network and the mirror neuron 
system (AON/MNS) in children and its age-related properties compared with those 
observed in adults. In the present fMRI study we explored the activation of 
areas belonging to the AON/MNS in children and adults during observation of 
complex hand-grasping actions, as compared to observation of simple grasping 
acts executed with the left and the right hand, seen from a first person 
perspective. The results indicate that during the action observation tasks in 
children there was activation of a cortical network similar to that found in 
adults, including the premotor cortex, the posterior part of the inferior 
frontal gyrus and the posterior parietal lobe. However, the activation in 
children was more widespread and showed a higher inter-subject variability 
compared with adults. Furthermore, the activated network seems more lateralized 
to the left hemisphere in adults and more bilateral in children, with a linear 
growth of lateralization index as a function of age. Finally, in children the 
activation in the anterior intraparietal cortex (AIP) of each hemisphere was 
higher during observation of the contralateral hand (hand identity effect) and 
during the observation of complex actions relative to simple grasping acts, 
confirming the role of AIP for action-related hand identity previously described 
in adults. These results support the assumption that structure and size of 
action representations are sensitive to mechanisms of development and show 
physiological plasticity. These properties of the AON/MNS could constitute a 
powerful tool for spontaneous reorganization and recovery of motor deficits 
after brain injury in children and in adults, as well as for specific 
rehabilitation programmes.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12353
PMID: 26537750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):1104-1110. doi: 10.1111/desc.12351. Epub 2015 Oct 21.

Native Amazonian children forego egalitarianism in merit-based tasks when they 
learn to count.

Jara-Ettinger J(1), Gibson E(2), Kidd C(3)(4), Piantadosi S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, MIT, USA. jjara@mit.edu.
(2)Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, MIT, USA.
(3)Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester, USA.
(4)Center for Visual Science, University of Rochester, USA.

Cooperation often results in a final material resource that must be shared, but 
deciding how to distribute that resource is not straightforward. A distribution 
could count as fair if all members receive an equal reward (egalitarian 
distributions), or if each member's reward is proportional to their merit 
(merit-based distributions). Here, we propose that the acquisition of numerical 
concepts influences how we reason about fairness. We explore this possibility in 
the Tsimane', a farming-foraging group who live in the Bolivian rainforest. The 
Tsimane' learn to count in the same way children from industrialized countries 
do, but at a delayed and more variable timeline, allowing us to de-confound 
number knowledge from age and years in school. We find that Tsimane' children 
who can count produce merit-based distributions, while children who cannot count 
produce both merit-based and egalitarian distributions. Our findings establish 
that the ability to count - a non-universal, language-dependent, cultural 
invention - can influence social cognition.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12351
PMID: 26490060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Dev Sci. 2019 May;22(3):e12766. doi: 10.1111/desc.12766. Epub 2018 Nov 18.

From negative reactivity to empathic responding: Infants high in negative 
reactivity express more empathy later in development, with the help of 
regulation.

Abramson L(1), Paz Y(1), Knafo-Noam A(1).

Author information:
(1)Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.

Empathy has great effect on human well-being, promoting healthy relationships 
and social competence. Although it is increasingly acknowledged that infants 
show empathy toward others, individual differences in infants' empathy from the 
first year of life have rarely been investigated longitudinally. Here we 
examined how negative reactivity and regulation, two temperament traits that 
predict empathic responses in older children and adults, relate to infants' 
empathy. Infants were studied at the ages of nine (N = 275) and 18 (N = 301) 
months (194 infants were studied at both ages). Empathic responses were assessed 
by infants' observed reactions to an experimenter's simulated distress. Negative 
reactivity (fear, sadness, and distress to limitations) and regulation 
(soothability and effortful control) were assessed by parental reports. Negative 
reactivity was also examined by infants' observed reactions to an adult stranger 
(fear) and during interaction with their mothers (displays of sadness/distress). 
When examined cross-sectionally, infants' fear and distress to limitations 
associated with self-distress in response to others' distress. In contrast, when 
examined longitudinally, early sadness and distress to limitations, but not 
fear, associated with later empathic concern and inquisitiveness. Moreover, this 
longitudinal relation was moderated by infants' soothability and was evident 
only for children that had high soothability by the later time-point. Our 
findings suggest that infants who at an earlier age show negative reactivity, 
react later in development with more empathy if they achieve sufficient 
regulation abilities. By that, the findings stress the developmental nature of 
temperament-empathy relations during infancy.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12766
PMID: 30339317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2):10.1111/desc.12550. doi: 10.1111/desc.12550. Epub 2017 
Feb 15.

Verbal-spatial IQ discrepancies impact brain activation associated with the 
resolution of cognitive conflict in children and adolescents.

Margolis AE(1), Davis KS(1), Pao LS(1), Lewis A(1), Yang X(1), Tau G(1), Zhao 
G(1), Wang Z(1), Marsh R(1).

Author information:
(1)The Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry in the Department of 
Psychiatry, the New York State Psychiatric Institute and the College of 
Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, USA.

Verbal-spatial discrepancies are common in healthy individuals and in those with 
neurodevelopmental disorders associated with cognitive control deficits 
including: Autism Spectrum Disorder, Non-Verbal Learning Disability, Fragile X, 
22q11 deletion, and Turner Syndrome. Previous data from healthy individuals 
suggest that the magnitude of the difference between verbal IQ (VIQ) and 
performance IQ (PIQ) scores (the VIQ>PIQ discrepancy) is associated with reduced 
thickness in frontal and parietal cortices (inferior frontal, anterior 
cingulate, inferior parietal lobule, and supramarginal gyrus) that support 
cognitive control. Unknown is whether the VIQ>PIQ discrepancy is associated with 
functional deficits in these areas in healthy or ill children and adolescents. 
We assessed the effects of the VIQ>PIQ discrepancy on fMRI BOLD response during 
the resolution of cognitive conflict in 55 healthy children and adolescents 
during performance of a Simon Spatial Incompatibility task. As the magnitude of 
the VIQ>PIQ discrepancy increased, activation of fronto-striatal, limbic, and 
temporal regions decreased during conflict resolution (p < .05, corrected). In 
exploratory analyses, the VIQ>PIQ discrepancy was associated with reduced 
functional connectivity from right inferior frontal gyrus to right thalamus and 
increased functional connectivity to right supramarginal gyrus (ps < .03, 
uncorrected). The VIQ>PIQ discrepancy may be an important aspect of an 
individual's cognitive profile and likely contributes to, or is associated with, 
deficient cognitive control processes characteristic of many childhood 
disorders.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12550
PMCID: PMC5557695
PMID: 28198067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12567. doi: 10.1111/desc.12567. Epub 2017 Jul 18.

Investigating the origins of political views: biases in explanation predict 
conservative attitudes in children and adults.

Hussak LJ(1), Cimpian A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Illinois, Champaign, Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, New York University, New York, USA.

We tested the hypothesis that political attitudes are influenced by an 
information-processing factor - namely, a bias in the content of everyday 
explanations. Because many societal phenomena are enormously complex, people's 
understanding of them often relies on heuristic shortcuts. For instance, when 
generating explanations for such phenomena (e.g., why does this group have low 
status?), people often rely on facts that they can retrieve easily from memory - 
facts that are skewed toward inherent or intrinsic features (e.g., this group is 
unintelligent). We hypothesized that this bias in the content of heuristic 
explanations leads to a tendency to (1) view socioeconomic stratification as 
acceptable and (2) prefer current societal arrangements to alternative ones, two 
hallmarks of conservative ideology. Moreover, since the inherence bias in 
explanation is present across development, we expected it to shape children's 
proto-political judgments as well. Three studies with adults and 4- to 
8-year-old children (N = 784) provided support for these predictions: Not only 
did individual differences in reliance on inherent explanations uniquely predict 
endorsement of conservative views (particularly the stratification-supporting 
component; Study 1), but manipulations of this explanatory bias also had 
downstream consequences for political attitudes in both children and adults 
(Studies 2 and 3). This work contributes to our understanding of the origins of 
political attitudes.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12567
PMID: 28722292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):901-917. doi: 10.1111/desc.12341. Epub 2015 Sep 9.

Development of infants' segmentation of words from native speech: a 
meta-analytic approach.

Bergmann C(1), Cristia A(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et Psycholinguistique (ENS, EHESS, CNRS), 
Département d'Etudes Cognitives, Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL Research 
University, Paris, France. chbergma@gmail.com.
(2)Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et Psycholinguistique (ENS, EHESS, CNRS), 
Département d'Etudes Cognitives, Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL Research 
University, Paris, France.

Infants start learning words, the building blocks of language, at least by 
6 months. To do so, they must be able to extract the phonological form of words 
from running speech. A rich literature has investigated this process, termed 
word segmentation. We addressed the fundamental question of how infants of 
different ages segment words from their native language using a meta-analytic 
approach. Based on previous popular theoretical and experimental work, we 
expected infants to display familiarity preferences early on, with a switch to 
novelty preferences as infants become more proficient at processing and 
segmenting native speech. We also considered the possibility that this switch 
may occur at different points in time as a function of infants' native language 
and took into account the impact of various task- and stimulus-related factors 
that might affect difficulty. The combined results from 168 experiments 
reporting on data gathered from 3774 infants revealed a persistent familiarity 
preference across all ages. There was no significant effect of additional 
factors, including native language and experiment design. Further analyses 
revealed no sign of selective data collection or reporting. We conclude that 
models of infant information processing that are frequently cited in this domain 
may not, in fact, apply in the case of segmenting words from native speech.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12341
PMID: 26353859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Dev Sci. 2018 Jan;21(1):10.1111/desc.12484. doi: 10.1111/desc.12484. Epub 2016 
Nov 4.

Mother still knows best: Maternal influence uniquely modulates adolescent reward 
sensitivity during risk taking.

Guassi Moreira JF(1)(2), Telzer EH(1)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of California at Los Angeles, USA.
(3)Neuroscience Program, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA.
(4)Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Illinois 
at Urbana-Champaign, USA.
(5)Department of Psychology & Neuroscience, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, USA.

Adolescent decision-making is highly sensitive to input from the social 
environment. In particular, adult and maternal presence influence adolescents to 
make safer decisions when encountered with risky scenarios. However, it is 
currently unknown whether maternal presence confers a greater advantage than 
mere adult presence in buffering adolescent risk taking. In the current study, 
23 adolescents completed a risk-taking task during an fMRI scan in the presence 
of their mother and an unknown adult. Results reveal that maternal presence 
elicits greater activation in reward-related neural circuits when making safe 
decisions but decreased activation following risky choices. Moreover, 
adolescents evidenced a more immature neural phenotype when making risky choices 
in the presence of an adult compared to mother, as evidenced by positive 
functional coupling between the ventral striatum and medial prefrontal cortex. 
Our results underscore the importance of maternal stimuli in bolstering 
adolescent decision-making in risky scenarios.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12484
PMCID: PMC5752112
PMID: 29282834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12533. Epub 2017 May 12.

Children's intuitive sense of number develops independently of their perception 
of area, density, length, and time.

Odic D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

Young children can quickly and intuitively represent the number of objects in a 
visual scene through the Approximate Number System (ANS). The precision of the 
ANS - indexed as the most difficult ratio of two numbers that children can 
reliably discriminate - is well known to improve with development: whereas 
infants require relatively large ratios to discriminate number, children can 
discriminate finer and finer changes in number between toddlerhood and early 
adulthood. Which factors drive the developmental improvements in ANS precision? 
Here, we investigate the influence of four non-numeric dimensions - area, 
density, line length, and time - on ANS development, exploring the degree to 
which the ANS develops independently from these other dimensions, from 
inhibitory control, and from domain-general factors such as attention and 
working memory that are shared between these tasks. A sample of 185 children 
between the ages of 2 and 12 years completed five discrimination tasks: 
approximate number, area, density, length, and time. We report three main 
findings. First, logistic growth models applied to both accuracy and Weber 
fractions (w; an index of ANS precision) across age reveal distinct 
developmental trajectories across the five dimensions: while area and length 
develop by adolescence, time and density do not develop fully until early 
adulthood, with ANS precision developing at an intermediate rate. Second, we 
find that ANS precision develops independently of the other four dimensions, 
which in turn develop independently of the ANS. Third, we find that ANS 
precision also develops independently from individual differences in inhibitory 
control (indexed as the difference in accuracy and w between Congruent and 
Incongruent ANS trials). Together, these results are the first to provide 
evidence for domain-specific improvements in ANS precision, and place children's 
maturing perception of number, space, and time into a broader developmental 
context.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12533
PMID: 28497512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):1058-1066. doi: 10.1111/desc.12370. Epub 2015 Dec 21.

Motor training at 3 months affects object exploration 12 months later.

Libertus K(1), Joh AS(2), Needham AW(3).

Author information:
(1)Learning Research and Development Center, University of Pittsburgh, USA. 
Klaus.Libertus@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Psychology, Seton Hall University, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology and Human Development, Peabody College, Vanderbilt 
University, USA.

The development of new motor skills alters how infants interact with objects and 
people. Consequently, it has been suggested that motor skills may initiate a 
cascade of events influencing subsequent development. However, only 
correlational evidence for this assumption has been obtained thus far. The 
current study addressed this question experimentally by systematically varying 
reaching experiences in 40 three-month-old infants who were not reaching on 
their own yet and examining their object engagement in a longitudinal follow-up 
assessment 12 months later. Results revealed increased object exploration and 
attention focusing skills in 15-month-old infants who experienced active 
reaching at 3 months of age compared to untrained infants or infants who only 
passively experienced reaching. Further, grasping activity after - but not 
before - reaching training predicted infants' object exploration 12 months 
later. These findings provide evidence for the long-term effects of reaching 
experiences and illustrate the cascading effects initiated by early motor 
skills.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12370
PMCID: PMC4916043
PMID: 26689742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12632. doi: 10.1111/desc.12632. Epub 2017 Dec 11.

Family conflict is associated with longitudinal changes in insular-striatal 
functional connectivity during adolescent risk taking under maternal influence.

Guassi Moreira JF(1), Telzer EH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology & Neuroscience, University of North Carolina, Chapel 
Hill, NC, USA.

Maternal presence has marked effects on adolescent neurocognition during risk 
taking, influencing teenagers to make safer decisions. However, it is currently 
unknown whether maternal buffering changes over the course of adolescence 
itself, and whether its effects are robust to individual differences in family 
relationship quality. In the current longitudinal study, 23 adolescents 
completed a risk-taking task under maternal presence during an fMRI scan before 
and after the transition to high school. Behavioral results reveal that 
adolescent risk taking increased under maternal presence across a one-year 
period. At the neural level, we found that adolescents reporting higher family 
conflict showed longitudinal increases in functional coupling between the 
anterior insula (AI) and ventral striatum (VS) when making safe decisions in the 
presence of their mother, which was associated with increased real-world risk 
taking. These findings show that individual differences in family relationship 
quality undermine effective development of AI-VS connectivity resulting in 
increased risk taking.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12632
PMCID: PMC5995633
PMID: 29226484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12571. doi: 10.1111/desc.12571. Epub 2017 May 30.

Salience network response to changes in emotional expressions of others is 
heightened during early adolescence: relevance for social functioning.

Rosen ML(1), Sheridan MA(2), Sambrook KA(3), Dennison MJ(1), Jenness JL(4), 
Askren MK(1), Meltzoff AN(1), McLaughlin KA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(3)Department of Radiology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.

Adolescence is a unique developmental period when the salience of social and 
emotional information becomes particularly pronounced. Although this increased 
sensitivity to social and emotional information has frequently been considered 
with respect to risk behaviors and psychopathology, evidence suggests that 
increased adolescent sensitivity to social and emotional cues may confer 
advantages. For example, greater sensitivity to shifts in the emotions of others 
is likely to promote flexible and adaptive social behavior. In this study, a 
sample of 54 children and adolescents (age 8-19 years) performed a delayed 
match-to-sample task for emotional faces while undergoing fMRI scanning. 
Recruitment of the anterior cingulate and anterior insula when the emotion of 
the probe face did not match the emotion held in memory followed a quadratic 
developmental pattern that peaked during early adolescence. These findings 
indicate meaningful developmental variation in the neural mechanisms underlying 
sensitivity to changes in the emotional expressions. Across all participants, 
greater activation of this network for changes in emotional expression was 
associated with less social anxiety and fewer social problems. These results 
suggest that the heightened salience of social and emotional information during 
adolescence may confer important advantages for social behavior, providing 
sensitivity to others' emotions that facilitates flexible social responding.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12571
PMCID: PMC5709230
PMID: 28557315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan 21:e13084. doi: 10.1111/desc.13084. Online ahead of print.

Early childhood poverty and adult executive functioning: Distinct, mediating 
pathways for different domains of executive functioning.

Evans GW(1), Farah MJ(2), Hackman DA(3).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Design & Environmental Analysis and of Human Development, 
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)USC Suzanne Dworak-Peck School of Social Work, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Executive functioning in adulthood is associated with early-in-life 
disadvantage. Furthermore, distinct and independent underlying processes account 
for differences in specific domains of adult executive functioning. The duration 
of poverty from birth to age 9 is associated with reduced adult inhibitory 
control assessed by the Flanker task (n = 233, M = 23.52 years). This effect is 
largely explained by lower levels of maternal responsiveness in adolescence. 
Early poverty also related to worse working memory in adulthood, and this effect 
is partially explained by elevated allostatic load during adolescence, an index 
of chronic physiological stress.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13084
PMID: 33475221


465. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12588. doi: 10.1111/desc.12588. Epub 2017 Sep 7.

Not all phonological awareness deficits are created equal: evidence from a 
comparison between children with Otitis Media and poor readers.

Carroll JM(1), Breadmore HL(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Research in Psychology, Behaviour and Achievement, Coventry 
University, Coventry, UK.

Children with reading difficulties and children with a history of repeated ear 
infections (Otitis Media, OM) are both thought to have phonological impairments, 
but for quite different reasons. This paper examines the profile of phonological 
and morphological awareness in poor readers and children with OM. Thirty-three 
poor readers were compared to individually matched chronological age and reading 
age controls. Their phonological awareness and morphological awareness skills 
were consistently at the level of reading age matched controls. Unexpectedly, a 
significant minority (25%) of the poor readers had some degree of undiagnosed 
mild or very mild hearing loss. Twenty-nine children with a history of OM and 
their matched controls completed the same battery of tasks. They showed 
relatively small delays in their literacy and showed no impairment in 
morphological awareness but had phonological awareness scores below the level of 
reading age matched controls. Further analysis suggested that this weakness in 
phonological awareness was carried by a specific weakness in segmenting and 
blending phonemes, with relatively good performance on phoneme manipulation 
tasks. Results suggest that children with OM show a circumscribed deficit in 
phoneme segmentation and blending, while poor readers show a broader 
metalinguistic impairment which is more closely associated with reading 
difficulties.

© 2017 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12588
PMCID: PMC5947145
PMID: 28880490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2):10.1111/desc.12512. doi: 10.1111/desc.12512. Epub 2016 
Dec 29.

Adults blink more deeply: a comparative study of the attentional blink across 
different age groups.

Russo N(1), Kates WR(2), Shea N(1), LeBlanc M(1), Wyble B(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, State University of New 
York at Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Penn State University, State College, PA, USA.

The attentional blink (AB) is thought to help the visual system parse and 
categorize rapidly changing information by segmenting it into temporal chunks, 
and is elicited using Rapid Serial Visual Presentation. It is reflected in a 
decrease in accuracy at detecting the second of two targets presented within 
200-500 ms of the first, and its development appears to be protracted on tasks 
that require set-shifting. Here, younger (M = 8.5 years) and older 
(M = 12.8 years) children and adults (M = 19.13 years) completed a simple AB 
task with no set-shift requirement in which participants detected two letters in 
a stream of numbers presented at a rate of 135 ms/item. In addition to assessing 
the developmental course of the AB on this simple task, we also assessed 
temporal order errors, or swaps. The AB and its associated characteristics are 
present in both groups but developmental differences were noted in the depth of 
the AB, and the presence or absence of lag-1 sparing. These developmental 
changes were explained by changes in a single parameter, inhibition, using the 
eTST model, which suggests that the AB is an adaptive function of the visual 
system.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12512
PMCID: PMC5491367
PMID: 28032434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Dev Sci. 2018 Jan;21(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12495. Epub 2016 Dec 15.

Attaching meaning to the number words: contributions of the object tracking and 
approximate number systems.

vanMarle K(1), Chu FW(1), Mou Y(1), Seok JH(1), Rouder J(1), Geary DC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, 
Missouri, USA.
(2)Interdisciplinary Neuroscience Program, University of Missouri, Columbia, 
Missouri, USA.

Children's understanding of the quantities represented by number words (i.e., 
cardinality) is a surprisingly protracted but foundational step in their 
learning of formal mathematics. The development of cardinal knowledge is related 
to one or two core, inherent systems - the approximate number system (ANS) and 
the object tracking system (OTS) - but whether these systems act alone, in 
concert, or antagonistically is debated. Longitudinal assessments of 198 
preschool children on OTS, ANS, and cardinality tasks enabled testing of two 
single-mechanism (ANS-only and OTS-only) and two dual-mechanism models, 
controlling for intelligence, executive functions, preliteracy skills, and 
demographic factors. Measures of both OTS and ANS predicted cardinal knowledge 
in concert early in the school year, inconsistent with single-mechanism models. 
The ANS but not the OTS predicted cardinal knowledge later in the school year as 
well the acquisition of the cardinal principle, a critical shift in cardinal 
understanding. The results support a Merge model, whereby both systems initially 
contribute to children's early mapping of number words to cardinal value, but 
the role of the OTS diminishes over time while that of the ANS continues to 
support cardinal knowledge as children come to understand the counting 
principles.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12495
PMID: 27981702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Dev Sci. 2019 Jul;22(4):e12790. doi: 10.1111/desc.12790. Epub 2019 Jan 10.

Talking about proportion: Fraction labels impact numerical interference in 
non-symbolic proportional reasoning.

Hurst MA(1), Cordes S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(2)Department of Psychology, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts.

Across two experiments, we investigated how verbal labels impact the way young 
children attend to proportional information, well before the introduction of 
formal fraction education. Five- to seven-year-old children were introduced to 
equivalent non-symbolic proportions labeled in one of three ways: (a) a single, 
categorical label for multiple fractions (both 3/4 and 6/8 referred to as 
"blick"), (b) labels that focused on the numerator [e.g., 3/4 labeled as "three 
blicks" (Experiment 1) or "three-fourths" (Experiment 2)], or (c) labels that 
had a complete part-whole structure ("three-out-of-four"). Children then 
completed measures of non-symbolic proportional reasoning that pitted 
whole-number information against proportional information for novel proportions. 
Across both experiments, children who heard the categorical labels were more 
likely to match non-symbolic displays based on proportion than children in any 
of the other conditions, who demonstrated higher levels of numerical 
interference. These findings suggest that fraction labels have the potential to 
shape children's attention to proportional information even in the context of 
non-symbolic part-whole displays and for children who are not familiar with 
formal fraction symbols. We discuss these findings in terms of children's 
developing understanding of proportional reasoning and its implications for 
fraction education.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12790
PMID: 30554479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Dev Sci. 2017 Nov;20(6). doi: 10.1111/desc.12475. Epub 2016 Nov 4.

Neural activation patterns during retrieval of schema-related memories: 
differences and commonalities between children and adults.

Brod G(1), Lindenberger U(1)(2), Shing YL(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Center for Lifespan Psychology, 
Berlin, Germany.
(2)European University Institute, San Domenico di Fiesole, Italy.
(3)Division of Psychology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, University of Stirling, 
UK.

Schemas represent stable properties of individuals' experiences, and allow them 
to classify new events as being congruent or incongruent with existing 
knowledge. Research with adults indicates that the prefrontal cortex (PFC) is 
involved in memory retrieval of schema-related information. However, 
developmental differences between children and adults in the neural correlates 
of schema-related memories are not well understood. One reason for this is the 
inherent confound between schema-relevant experience and maturation, as both are 
related to time. To overcome this limitation, we used a novel paradigm that 
experimentally induces, and then probes for, task-relevant knowledge during 
encoding of new information. Thirty-one children aged 8-12 years and 26 young 
adults participated in the experiment. While successfully retrieving 
schema-congruent events, children showed less medial PFC activity than adults. 
In addition, medial PFC activity during successful retrieval correlated 
positively with children's age. While successfully retrieving schema-incongruent 
events, children showed stronger hippocampus (HC) activation as well as weaker 
connectivity between the striatum and the dorsolateral PFC than adults. These 
findings were corroborated by an exploratory full-factorial analysis 
investigating age differences in the retrieval of schema-congruent versus 
schema-incongruent events, comparing the two conditions directly. Consistent 
with the findings of the separate analyses, two clusters, one in the medial PFC, 
one in the HC, were identified that exhibited a memory × congruency × age group 
interaction. In line with the two-component model of episodic memory 
development, the present findings point to an age-related shift from a more 
HC-bound processing to an increasing recruitment of prefrontal brain regions in 
the retrieval of schema-related events.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12475
PMID: 29076268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Dev Sci. 2018 Jan;21(1):10.1111/desc.12508. doi: 10.1111/desc.12508. Epub 2016 
Oct 16.

Functional connectivity differences in autism during face and car recognition: 
underconnectivity and atypical age-related changes.

Lynn AC(1), Padmanabhan A(2), Simmonds D(3), Foran W(3), Hallquist MN(3)(4), 
Luna B(3)(4)(5), O'Hearn K(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive, Linguistic and Psychological Sciences, Brown 
University, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Stanford University, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Neurocognitive Development, University of Pittsburgh, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, USA.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, USA.

Face recognition abilities improve between adolescence and adulthood over 
typical development (TD), but plateau in autism, leading to increasing face 
recognition deficits in autism later in life. Developmental differences between 
autism and TD may reflect changes between neural systems involved in the 
development of face encoding and recognition. Here, we focused on whole-brain 
connectivity with the fusiform face area (FFA), a well-established 
face-preferential brain region. Older children, adolescents, and adults with and 
without autism completed the Cambridge Face Memory Test, and a matched car 
memory test, during fMRI scanning. We then examined task-based functional 
connectivity between the FFA and the rest of the brain, comparing autism and TD 
groups during encoding and recognition of face and car stimuli. The autism group 
exhibited underconnectivity, relative to the TD group, between the FFA and 
frontal and primary visual cortices, independent of age. Underconnectivity with 
the medial and rostral lateral prefrontal cortex was face-specific during 
encoding and recognition, respectively. Conversely, underconnectivity with the L 
orbitofrontal cortex was evident for both face and car encoding. Atypical 
age-related changes in connectivity emerged between the FFA and the R 
temporoparietal junction, and R dorsal striatum for face stimuli only. Similar 
differences in age-related changes in autism emerged for FFA connectivity with 
the amygdala across both face and car recognition. Thus, underconnectivity and 
atypical development of functional connectivity may lead to a less optimal 
face-processing network in the context of increasing general and social 
cognitive deficits in autism.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12508
PMCID: PMC5392438
PMID: 27748031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12520. Epub 2016 Dec 15.

The eye of the retriever: developing episodic memory mechanisms in preverbal 
infants assessed through pupil dilation.

Hellmer K(1), Söderlund H(2), Gredebäck G(1).

Author information:
(1)Uppsala Child and Baby Lab, Department of Psychology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Uppsala Memory Lab, Department of Psychology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.

Studying memory in infants can be challenging, as they cannot express their 
subjective recollection verbally. In this study we use a novel method with which 
we can assess episodic recognition memory through pupillometry, using identical 
procedures and stimuli for infants and adults. In three experiments of 4- and 
7-month-old infants, and adults we show that the adult pupillary response is 
larger to previously seen than to never seen items (old/new effect). Pupil 
dilations index subjective memory experience in adults, producing distinct pupil 
dilations to items judged as remembered, familiar, and new, regardless of actual 
previous exposure (Experiment 1). Seven-month-old infants demonstrate a clear 
pupillary old/new effect, very similar to that of adults (Experiment 2), whereas 
4-month-olds do not demonstrate such an effect (Experiment 3). Our findings 
suggest that the mnemonic mechanisms that serve infants' and adults' episodic 
recognition memory are more similar than previously asserted: they are not fully 
developed at 4 months of age but that there is contiguity in human episodic 
memory development from 7 months of age.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12520
PMID: 27981704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2):10.1111/desc.12522. doi: 10.1111/desc.12522. Epub 2016 
Dec 29.

Maturation constrains the effect of exposure in linking language and thought: 
evidence from healthy preterm infants.

Perszyk DR(1), Ferguson B(1), Waxman SR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA.
(2)Institue for Policy Research, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA.

The power of human language rests upon its intricate links to human cognition. 
By 3 months of age, listening to language supports infants' ability to form 
object categories, a building block of cognition. Moreover, infants display a 
systematic shift between 3 and 4 months - a shift from familiarity to novelty 
preferences - in their expression of this link between language and core 
cognitive processes. Here, we capitalize on this tightly-timed developmental 
shift in fullterm infants to assess (a) whether it also appears in preterm 
infants and (b) whether it reflects infants' maturational status or the duration 
of their postnatal experience. Healthy late preterm infants (N = 22) 
participated in an object categorization task while listening to language. Their 
performance, coupled with that of fullterm infants, reveals that this 
developmental shift is evident in preterm infants and unfolds on the same 
maturational timetable as in their fullterm counterparts.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12522
PMCID: PMC5519447
PMID: 28032433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12605. doi: 10.1111/desc.12605. Epub 2017 Sep 15.

What's parenting got to do with it: emotional autonomy and brain and behavioral 
responses to emotional conflict in children and adolescents.

Marusak HA(1), Thomason ME(2)(3)(4), Sala-Hamrick K(5), Crespo L(5), Rabinak 
CA(1)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
(3)Merill Palmer Skillman Institute, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
(4)Perinatology Research Branch, National Institutes of Health, Detroit, MI, 
USA.
(5)Department of Psychology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
(6)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, 
USA.
(7)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Neurosciences, Wayne State University, 
Detroit, MI, USA.

Healthy parenting may be protective against the development of emotional 
psychopathology, particularly for children reared in stressful environments. 
Little is known, however, about the brain and behavioral mechanisms underlying 
this association, particularly during childhood and adolescence, when emotional 
disorders frequently emerge. Here, we demonstrate that psychological control, a 
parenting strategy known to limit socioemotional development in children, is 
associated with altered brain and behavioral responses to emotional conflict in 
27 at-risk (urban, lower income) youth, ages 9-16. In particular, youth 
reporting higher parental psychological control demonstrated lower activity in 
the left anterior insula, a brain area involved in emotion conflict processing, 
and submitted faster but less accurate behavioral responses-possibly reflecting 
an avoidant pattern. Effects were not replicated for parental care, and did not 
generalize to an analogous nonemotional conflict task. We also find evidence 
that behavioral responses to emotional conflict bridge the previously reported 
link between parental overcontrol and anxiety in children. Effects of 
psychological control may reflect a parenting style that limits opportunities to 
practice self-regulation when faced with emotionally charged situations. Results 
support the notion that parenting strategies that facilitate appropriate amounts 
of socioemotional competence and autonomy in children may be protective against 
social and emotional difficulties.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12605
PMCID: PMC6636326
PMID: 28913886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.


474. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2):10.1111/desc.12536. doi: 10.1111/desc.12536. Epub 2017 
Feb 22.

What explains the correlation between growth in vocabulary and grammar? New 
evidence from latent change score analyses of simultaneous bilingual 
development.

Hoff E(1), Quinn JM(2), Giguere D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Florida Atlantic University, Florida, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Florida State University, Florida, USA.

A close relationship between children's vocabulary size and the grammatical 
complexity of their speech is well attested but not well understood. The present 
study used latent change score modeling to examine the dynamic relationships 
between vocabulary and grammar growth within and across languages in 
longitudinal data from 90 simultaneous Spanish-English bilingual children who 
were assessed at 6-month intervals between 30 and 48 months. Slopes of 
vocabulary and grammar growth were strongly correlated within each language and 
showed moderate or nonsignificant relationships across languages. There was no 
evidence that vocabulary level predicted subsequent grammar growth or that the 
level of grammatical development predicted subsequent vocabulary growth. We 
propose that a common influence of properties of input on vocabulary and 
grammatical development is the source of their correlated but uncoupled growth. 
An unanticipated across-language finding was a negative relationship between 
level of English skill and subsequent Spanish growth. We propose that the 
cultural context of Spanish-English bilingualism in the US is the reason that 
strong English skills jeopardize Spanish language growth, while Spanish skills 
do not affect English growth. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at: 
https://youtu.be/qEHSQ0yRre0.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12536
PMCID: PMC5568516
PMID: 28229511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):947-956. doi: 10.1111/desc.12344. Epub 2015 Oct 21.

Effect of socioeconomic status (SES) disparity on neural development in female 
African-American infants at age 1 month.

Betancourt LM(1), Avants B(2), Farah MJ(3), Brodsky NL(4), Wu J(2), Ashtari 
M(5), Hurt H(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neonatology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, USA. 
betancourtl@email.chop.edu.
(2)Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Neonatology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, USA.
(5)Department of Radiology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, USA.
(6)The Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, USA.

There is increasing interest in both the cumulative and long-term impact of 
early life adversity on brain structure and function, especially as the brain is 
both highly vulnerable and highly adaptive during childhood. Relationships 
between SES and neural development have been shown in children older than age 
2 years. Less is known regarding the impact of SES on neural development in 
children before age 2. This paper examines the effect of SES, indexed by 
income-to-needs (ITN) and maternal education, on cortical gray, deep gray, and 
white matter volumes in term, healthy, appropriate for gestational age, 
African-American, female infants. At 5 weeks postnatal age, unsedated infants 
underwent MRI (3.0T Siemens Verio scanner, 32-channel head coil). Images were 
segmented based on a locally constructed template. Utilizing hierarchical linear 
regression, SES effects on MRI volumes were examined. In this cohort of healthy 
African-American female infants of varying SES, lower SES was associated with 
smaller cortical gray and deep gray matter volumes. These SES effects on neural 
outcome at such a young age build on similar studies of older children, 
suggesting that the biological embedding of adversity may occur very early in 
development.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12344
PMID: 26489876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Dev Sci. 2018 Jan;21(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12494. Epub 2016 Dec 15.

Frontal theta activation associated with error detection in toddlers: influence 
of familial socioeconomic status.

Conejero Á(1), Guerra S(1), Abundis-Gutiérrez A(1), Rueda MR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology & Center for Research on Mind, Brain, 
and Behavior (CIMCYC), University of Granada, Granada, Spain.

Error detection is one of the functions of the executive attention network, a 
brain system involved in executive control that includes the anterior cingulate 
cortex and other prefrontal regions. Despite the key role of this function in a 
wide range of life outcomes, very limited research has examined the early 
development of the network and whether its functional efficacy is related to 
environmental factors. Electrophysiological studies with adults have shown 
oscillatory activity in theta (4-7 Hz) range arising from medial frontal cortex 
that follows the detection of self-committed or observed errors. In the current 
study, we designed a novel experimental procedure that involved a 
familiarization phase with simple three-pieces puzzles followed by an 
experimental phase in which toddlers observed the puzzles being formed either 
correctly or incorrectly. Observation of incorrect configurations produced 
increased potentials in midline channels and greater power theta activity for 
both toddlers (n = 56) and adults (n = 14). In addition, socioeconomic status of 
the family in general, and parental education in particular, contributed to 
individual differences in the amplitude of the error-related signal and 
associated theta power in toddlers, indicating that children raised in lower SES 
families show poorer activation of the executive attention network. These data 
demonstrate the influence of environmental factors at the earliest stages of 
development of the executive attention network. Importantly, the results show 
that error-detection EEG signals can be used as neural markers of the initial 
development of executive attention, which can be of great help for the early 
detection of risk for developmental disorders involving deficits in this 
function.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12494
PMID: 27981736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12638. doi: 10.1111/desc.12638. Epub 2017 Dec 29.

Proximodistal exploration in motor learning as an emergent property of 
optimization.

Stulp F(1)(2)(3), Oudeyer PY(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)FLOWERS Team, INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, Talence, France.
(2)ENSTA ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, Paris, France.
(3)German Aerospace Center (DLR), Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics, 
Wessling, Germany.

To harness the complexity of their high-dimensional bodies during sensorimotor 
development, infants are guided by patterns of freezing and freeing of degrees 
of freedom. For instance, when learning to reach, infants free the degrees of 
freedom in their arm proximodistally, that is, from joints that are closer to 
the body to those that are more distant. Here, we formulate and study 
computationally the hypothesis that such patterns can emerge spontaneously as 
the result of a family of stochastic optimization processes, without an innate 
encoding of a maturational schedule. In particular, we present simulated 
experiments with an arm where a computational learner progressively acquires 
reaching skills through adaptive exploration, and we show that a proximodistal 
organization appears spontaneously, which we denote PDFF (Proximo Distal 
Freezing and Freeing of degrees of freedom). We also compare this emergent 
organization between different arm morphologies-from human-like to quite 
unnatural ones-to study the effect of different kinematic structures on the 
emergence of PDFF.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12638
PMID: 29285864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan 27. doi: 10.1111/desc.13089. Online ahead of print.

6-month-olds are sensitive to English morphology.

Kim Y(1)(2), Sundara M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Linguistics, University of California, Los Angeles.
(2)Program in Linguistics, Emory University.

Each language has its unique way to mark grammatical information such as gender, 
number and tense. For example, English marks number and tense/aspect information 
with morphological suffixes (e.g., -s or -ed). These morphological suffixes are 
crucial for language acquisition as they are basic building blocks of syntax, 
encode relationships, and convey meaning. Previous research shows that 
English-learning infants recognize morphological suffixes attached to nonce 
words by the end of the first year, although even 8-month-olds recognize them 
when they are attached to known words. These results support an acquisition 
trajectory where discovery of meaning guides infants' acquisition of 
morphological suffixes. In this paper, we re-evaluated English-learning infants' 
knowledge of morphological suffixes in the first year of life. We found that 
6-month-olds successfully segmented nonce words suffixed with -s,-ing,-ed and a 
pseudo-morpheme -sh. Additionally, they related nonce words suffixed with -s, 
but not -ing,-ed or a pseudo-morpheme -sh with stems. By 8-months, infants were 
also able to relate nonce words suffixed with -ing and stems. Our results show 
that infants demonstrate knowledge of morphological relatedness from the 
earliest stages of acquisition. They do so even in the absence of access to 
meaning. Based on these results, we argue for a developmental timeline where the 
acquisition of morphology is, at least, concurrent with the acquisition of 
phonology and meaning.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13089
PMID: 33503291


479. Dev Sci. 2017 Sep;20(5). doi: 10.1111/desc.12453. Epub 2016 Oct 23.

The influences and outcomes of phonological awareness: a study of MA, PA and 
auditory processing in pre-readers with a family risk of dyslexia.

Law JM(1), Wouters J(2), Ghesquière P(1).

Author information:
(1)Parenting and Special Education Research Unit, KU Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Laboratory for Experimental ORL, KU Leuven, Belgium.

The direct influence of phonological awareness (PA) on reading outcomes has been 
widely demonstrated, yet PA may also exert indirect influence on reading 
outcomes through other cognitive variables such as morphological awareness (MA). 
However, PA's own development is dependent and influenced by many extraneous 
variables such as auditory processing, which could ultimately impact reading 
outcomes. In a group of pre-reading children with a family risk of dyslexia and 
low-risk controls, this study sets out to answer questions surrounding PA's 
relationship at various grain sizes (syllable, onset/rime and phoneme) with 
measures of auditory processing (frequency modulation (FM) and an amplitude 
rise-time task (RT)) and MA, independent of reading experience. Group analysis 
revealed significant differences between high- and low-risk children on measures 
of MA, and PA at all grain sizes, while a trend for lower RT thresholds of 
high-risk children was found compared with controls. Correlational analysis 
demonstrated that MA is related to the composite PA score and syllable 
awareness. Group differences on MA and PA were re-examined including PA and MA, 
respectively, as control variables. Results exposed PA as a relevant component 
of MA, independent of reading experience.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12453
PMID: 27774757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan 23:e13088. doi: 10.1111/desc.13088. Online ahead of print.

All contexts are not created equal: Social stimuli win the competition for 
organizing reinforcement learning in 9-month-old infants.

Werchan D(1), Amso D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Health, New York University School of Medicine, New 
York, NY, 10016, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Columbia University, New York, NY, 10027, USA.

Previous work has shown that infants as young as 8 months of age can use certain 
features of the environment, such as the shape or color of visual stimuli, as 
cues to organize simple inputs into hierarchical rule structures, a robust form 
of reinforcement learning that supports generalization of prior learning to new 
contexts. However, especially in cluttered naturalistic environments, there are 
an abundance of potential cues that can be used to structure learning into 
hierarchical rule structures. It is unclear how infants determine what features 
constitute a higher-order context to organize inputs into hierarchical rule 
structures. Here we examine whether 9-month-old infants are biased to use social 
stimuli, relative to non-social stimuli, as a higher-order context to organize 
learning of simple visuospatial inputs into hierarchical rule sets. Infants were 
presented with four face/color-target location pairings, which could be learned 
most simply as individual associations. Alternatively, infants could use the 
faces or colorful backgrounds as a higher-order context to organize the inputs 
into simpler color-location or face-location rules, respectively. Infants were 
then given a generalization test designed to probe how they learned the initial 
pairings. Results indicated that infants appeared to use the faces as a 
higher-order context to organize simpler color-location rules, which then 
supported generalization of learning to new face-contexts. These findings 
provide new evidence that infants are biased to organize reinforcement learning 
around social stimuli.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13088
PMID: 33484594


481. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12707. doi: 10.1111/desc.12707. Epub 2018 Aug 8.

Cross-magnitude interactions across development: Longitudinal evidence for a 
general magnitude system.

Lourenco SF(1), Aulet LS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia.

There is general agreement that humans represent numerical, spatial, and 
temporal magnitudes from early in development. However, there is disagreement 
about whether different magnitudes converge within a general magnitude system 
and whether this system supports behavioral demonstrations of cross-magnitude 
interactions at different developmental time points. Using a longitudinal 
design, we found a relation between children's cross-magnitude interactions 
assessed at two developmental time points with different behavioral measures. 
More specifically, stronger cross-magnitude interactions in infancy (M = 9.3 
months) predicted a stronger cross-magnitude congruity effect at preschool age 
(M = 44.2 months), even when controlling for performance on measures of 
inhibitory control, analogical reasoning, and verbal competence at preschool 
age. The results suggest a common mechanism for cross-magnitude interactions at 
different points in development as well as stability of the underlying 
individual differences. We argue that this mechanism reflects a nonverbal 
general magnitude system that is operational early in life and that displays 
continuity from infancy to preschool age.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12707
PMCID: PMC6848978
PMID: 30088329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Dev Sci. 2021 Feb 2:e13093. doi: 10.1111/desc.13093. Online ahead of print.

Children favor punishment over restoration.

McAuliffe K(1)(2), Dunham Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.

Why do people punish selfish behavior? Are they motivated to punish perpetrators 
of selfishness (retribution) or to compensate the victims of selfishness 
(restoration)? Developmental data can provide important insight into these 
questions by revealing whether punishment of selfishness is more retributive or 
restorative when it first emerges. Across two studies, we examined costly 
third-party intervention in 6- to 9-year-olds. In Study 1, children learned 
about a selfish actor who refused to share with a recipient. Children then chose 
to (1) punish the selfish actor by rejecting their payoff (retribution); (2) 
compensate the victim of selfishness by equalizing payoffs between the 
perpetrator and victim (restoration); or (3) do nothing. We found that children 
were more likely to punish than compensate in response to selfishness, 
suggesting that intervention in this context is more retributive than 
restorative. In Study 2, we tested third-party intervention in the face of 
generosity which, like selfishness, can lead to unequal outcomes. As in Study 1, 
children in this context could reject unequal payoffs, thereby depriving the 
recipient of the advantageous payoff but having no effect on the actor. Children 
could also use compensation in this context, equalizing the payoffs between 
actor and recipient. We found that children did not punish inequality that 
stemmed from generosity, suggesting that the retributive punishment in Study 1 
was specifically targeting selfishness rather than inequality more generally. 
These results contribute to the debate on the function of third-party punishment 
in humans, suggesting that retributive motives towards selfish transgressors are 
privileged during ontogeny.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13093
PMID: 33527575


483. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):865-880. doi: 10.1111/desc.12334. Epub 2015 Jul 31.

Individual differences in neural mechanisms of selective auditory attention in 
preschoolers from lower socioeconomic status backgrounds: an event-related 
potentials study.

Isbell E(1), Wray AH(2), Neville HJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Oregon, USA. elif@uoregon.edu.
(2)Department of Communicative Sciences and Disorders, Michigan State 
University, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Oregon, USA.

Selective attention, the ability to enhance the processing of particular input 
while suppressing the information from other concurrent sources, has been 
postulated to be a foundational skill for learning and academic achievement. The 
neural mechanisms of this foundational ability are both vulnerable and 
enhanceable in children from lower socioeconomic status (SES) families. In the 
current study, we assessed individual differences in neural mechanisms of this 
malleable brain function in children from lower SES families. Specifically, we 
investigated the extent to which individual differences in neural mechanisms of 
selective auditory attention accounted for variability in nonverbal cognitive 
abilities in lower SES preschoolers. We recorded event-related potentials (ERPs) 
during a dichotic listening task and administered nonverbal IQ tasks to 124 
lower SES children (77 females) between the ages of 40 and 67 months. The 
attention effect, i.e., the difference in ERP mean amplitudes elicited by 
identical probes embedded in stories when attended versus unattended, was 
significantly correlated with nonverbal IQ scores. Larger, more positive 
attention effects over the anterior and central electrode locations were 
associated with superior nonverbal IQ performance. Our findings provide initial 
evidence for prominent individual differences in neural indices of selective 
attention in lower SES children. Furthermore, our results indicate a noteworthy 
relationship between neural mechanisms of selective attention and nonverbal IQ 
performance in lower SES preschoolers. These findings provide the basis for 
future research to identify the factors that contribute to such individual 
differences in neural mechanisms of selective attention.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12334
PMID: 26234822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Dev Sci. 2017 Sep;20(5):10.1111/desc.12479. doi: 10.1111/desc.12479. Epub 2016 
Oct 23.

Maternal and infant affect at 4 months predicts performance and verbal IQ at 4 
and 7 years in a diverse population.

Sheinkopf SJ(1)(2)(3), Tenenbaum EJ(1)(3), Messinger DS(4), Miller-Loncar 
CL(1)(2)(3), Tronick E(5)(6), Lagasse LL(2)(3), Shankaran S(7), Bada H(8), Bauer 
C(9), Whitaker T(10), Hammond J(11), Lester BM(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Warren Alpert Medical School of 
Brown University, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, 
USA.
(3)Brown Center for the Study of Children at Risk, Women & Infants Hospital of 
Rhode Island, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Miami, USA.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts Boston, USA.
(6)Harvard Medical School, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Wayne State University School of Medicine, USA.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, University of Kentucky, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, 
USA.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, University of Tennessee, USA.
(11)RTI International, USA.

Using existing longitudinal data from 570 infants in the Maternal Lifestyle 
Study, we explored the predictive value of maternal and infant affect and 
maternal vocalizations during 2 minutes of face-to-face interactions at 4 months 
on IQ scores at 4.5 and 7 years. After controlling for demographic factors, 
maternal depression, and prenatal drug exposure, maternal positive affect and 
maternal positive vocalizations emerged as predictors of both verbal and 
performance IQ at 4.5 and 7 years. Although infant positive affect during the 
interaction with the mother was not predictive of these outcome measures, infant 
positive affect towards an examiner predicted verbal but not performance IQ at 
4.5 years. These results suggest that maternal positive affect may index 
emotional engagement in interaction that facilitates both verbal and nonverbal 
cognitive development, while infant social positive affect is specifically 
related to the acquisition of verbal reasoning abilities. These findings are 
significant because they are based on a discrete snapshot of observable behavior 
in infancy (just 2 minutes of interaction), because they extend the range of 
maternal behaviors and characteristics known to support positive developmental 
outcomes, and because they are derived from high-risk infants where prevention 
efforts may be beneficial. Potential mechanisms for these associations are 
discussed, as are the clinical implications for identifying dyads most in need 
of targeted interventions.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12479
PMCID: PMC5401788
PMID: 27774733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12534. Epub 2017 Feb 16.

From prioritizing objects to prioritizing cues: a developmental shift for 
cognitive control.

Chevalier N(1), Dauvier B(2), Blaye A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(2)Centre PsyCLE, Aix-Marseille Université, Aix-en-Provence, France.
(3)Laboratoire de Psychologie Cognitive, Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, 
France.

Emerging cognitive control supports increasingly adaptive behaviors and predicts 
life success, while low cognitive control is a major risk factor during 
childhood. It is therefore essential to understand how it develops. The present 
study provides evidence for an age-related shift in the type of information that 
children prioritize in their environment, from objects that can be directly 
acted upon to cues signaling how to act. Specifically, gaze patterns recorded 
while 3- to 12-year-olds and adults engaged in a cognitive control task showed 
that whereas younger children fixated on targets that they needed to respond to 
before gazing at task cues signaling how to respond, older children and adults 
showed the opposite pattern (which yielded better performance). This shift in 
information prioritization has important conceptual implications, suggesting 
that a major force behind cognitive control development may be non-executive in 
nature, as well as opening new directions for interventions.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12534
PMID: 28211136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Dev Sci. 2021 Feb 4:e13095. doi: 10.1111/desc.13095. Online ahead of print.

Development of directed and random exploration in children.

Meder B(1), Wu CM(2), Schulz E(3), Ruggeri A(4).

Author information:
(1)Health and Medical University Potsdam, Max Planck Institute for Human 
Development.
(2)University of Tübingen, Max Planck Institute for Human Development.
(3)Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics.
(4)Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Technical University Munich.

Are young children just random explorers who learn serendipitously? Or are even 
young children guided by uncertainty-directed sampling, seeking to explore in a 
systematic fashion? We study how children between the ages of 4 and 9 search in 
an explore-exploit task with spatially-correlated rewards, where exhaustive 
exploration is infeasible and not all options can be experienced. By combining 
behavioral data with a computational model that decomposes search into 
similarity-based generalization, uncertainty-directed exploration, and random 
exploration, we map out developmental trajectories of generalization and 
exploration. The behavioral data show strong developmental differences in 
children's capability to exploit environmental structure, with performance and 
adaptiveness of sampling decisions increasing with age. Through model-based 
analyses, we disentangle different forms of exploration, finding signatures of 
both uncertainty-directed and random exploration. The amount of random 
exploration strongly decreases as children get older, supporting the notion of a 
developmental "cooling off" process that modulates the randomness in sampling. 
However, even at the youngest age range, children do not solely rely on random 
exploration. Even as random exploration begins to taper off, children are 
actively seeking out options with high uncertainty in a goal-directed fashion, 
and using inductive inferences to generalize their experience to novel options. 
Our findings provide critical insights into the behavioral and computational 
principles underlying the developmental trajectory of learning and exploration.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13095
PMID: 33539647


487. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan 23:e13086. doi: 10.1111/desc.13086. Online ahead of print.

Rapid Development of Perceptual Gaze Control in Hearing Native Signing Infants 
and Children.

Bosworth RG(1), Stone A(2).

Author information:
(1)National Technical Institute for the Deaf, Rochester Institute of Technology.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego.

Children's gaze behavior reflects emergent linguistic knowledge and real-time 
language processing of speech, but little is known about naturalistic gaze 
behaviors while watching signed narratives. Measuring gaze patterns in signing 
children could uncover how they master perceptual gaze control during a time of 
active language learning. Gaze patterns were recorded using a Tobii X120 
eye-tracker, in 31 non-signing and 30 signing hearing infants (5-14 months) and 
children (2-8 years) as they watched signed narratives on video. Intelligibility 
of the signed narratives was manipulated by presenting them naturally and in 
video-reversed ("low intelligibility") conditions. This video manipulation was 
used because it distorts semantic content, while preserving most surface 
phonological features. We examined where participants looked, using linear mixed 
models with Language Group (non-signing vs. signing) and Video Condition 
(Forward vs. Reversed), controlling for trial order. Non-signing infants and 
children showed a preference to look at the face as well as areas below the 
face, possibly because their gaze was drawn to the moving articulators in 
signing space. Native signing infants and children demonstrated resilient, 
face-focused gaze behavior. Moreover, their gaze behavior was unchanged for 
video-reversed signed narratives, similar to what was seen for adult native 
signers, possibly because they already have efficient highly focused gaze 
behavior. The present study demonstrates that human perceptual gaze control is 
sensitive to visual language experience over the first year of life and emerges 
early, by 6 months of age. Results have implications for the critical importance 
of early visual language exposure for deaf infants.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13086
PMID: 33484575


488. Dev Sci. 2021 Feb 2:e13091. doi: 10.1111/desc.13091. Online ahead of print.

Starting small: Exploring the origins of successor function knowledge.

Schneider RM(1), Pankonin A(1)(2), Schachner A(1), Barner D(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego.
(2)School of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, San Diego State University.
(3)Department of Linguistics, University of California, San Diego.

Although most U.S. children can accurately count sets by 4 years of age, many 
fail to understand the structural analogy between counting and number - that 
adding 1 to a set corresponds to counting up 1 word in the count list. While 
children are theorized to establish this Structure Mapping coincident with 
learning how counting is used to generate sets, they initially have an 
item-based understanding of this relationship, and can infer that, e.g, adding 1 
to "five" is "six", while failing to infer that, e.g., adding 1 to "twenty-five" 
is "twenty-six" despite being able to recite these numbers when counting aloud. 
The item-specific nature of children's successes in reasoning about the 
relationship between changes in cardinality and the count list raises the 
possibility that such a Structure Mapping emerges later in development, and that 
this ability does not initially depend on learning to count. We test this 
hypothesis in two experiments and find evidence that children can perform 
item-based addition operations before they become competent counters. Even after 
children learn to count, we find that their ability to perform addition 
operations remains item-based and restricted to very small numbers, rather than 
drawing on generalized knowledge of how the count list represents number. We 
discuss how these early item-based associations between number words and sets 
might play a role in constructing a generalized Structure Mapping between 
counting and quantity.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13091
PMID: 33527570


489. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan 26:e13090. doi: 10.1111/desc.13090. Online ahead of print.

Vocal development in a large-scale crosslinguistic corpus.

Cychosz M(1), Cristia A(2), Bergelson E(3), Casillas M(4), Baudet G(3), 
Warlaumont AS(5), Scaff C(2)(6), Yankowitz L(7), Seidl A(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hearing and Speech Sciences & Center for Comparative and 
Evolutionary Biology of Hearing, University of Maryland, College Park, USA.
(2)Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et de Psycholinguistique, Département 
d'études cognitives, ENS, EHESS, CNRS, PSL University, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Psychology & Neuroscience, Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, 
Duke University, Durham, USA.
(4)Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Communication, University of California, Los Angeles, USA.
(6)Human Ecology Group, Institute of Evolutionary Medicine, University of 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.
(8)Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, Purdue University, West 
Lafayette, USA.

This study evaluates whether early vocalizations develop in similar ways in 
children across diverse cultural contexts. We analyze data from daylong audio 
recordings of 49 children (1-36 months) from five different language/cultural 
backgrounds. Citizen scientists annotated these recordings to determine if child 
vocalizations contained canonical transitions or not (e.g., "ba" versus "ee"). 
Results revealed that the proportion of clips reported to contain canonical 
transitions increased with age. Further, this proportion exceeded 0.15 by around 
7 months, replicating and extending previous findings on canonical vocalization 
development but using data from the natural environments of a culturally and 
linguistically diverse sample. This work explores how crowdsourcing can be used 
to annotate corpora, helping establish developmental milestones relevant to 
multiple languages and cultures. Lower inter-annotator reliability on the 
crowdsourcing platform, relative to more traditional in-lab expert annotators, 
means that a larger number of unique annotators and/or annotations are required 
and that crowdsourcing may not be a suitable method for more fine-grained 
annotation decisions. Audio clips used for this project are compiled into a 
large-scale infant vocalization corpus that is available for other researchers 
to use in future work.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13090
PMID: 33497512


490. Dev Sci. 2017 Nov;20(6). doi: 10.1111/desc.12483. Epub 2016 Oct 17.

Little Bayesians or little Einsteins? Probability and explanatory virtue in 
children's inferences.

Johnston AM(1), Johnson SGB(1), Koven ML(2), Keil FC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Emory University, USA.

Like scientists, children seek ways to explain causal systems in the world. But 
are children scientists in the strict Bayesian tradition of maximizing posterior 
probability? Or do they attend to other explanatory considerations, as laypeople 
and scientists - such as Einstein - do? Four experiments support the latter 
possibility. In particular, we demonstrate in four experiments that 4- to 
8-year-old children, like adults, have a robust latent scope bias that leads to 
inferences that do not maximize posterior probability. When faced with two 
explanations equally consistent with observed data, where one explanation makes 
an unverified prediction, children consistently preferred the explanation that 
does not make this prediction (Experiment 1), even if the prior probabilities 
are identical (Experiment 3). Additional evidence suggests that this latent 
scope bias may result from the same explanatory strategies used by adults 
(Experiments 1 and 2), and can be attenuated by strong prior odds (Experiment 
4). We argue that children, like adults, rely on 'explanatory virtues' in 
inference - a strategy that often leads to normative responses, but can also 
lead to systematic error.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12483
PMID: 27750405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Dev Sci. 2021 Feb 5:e13097. doi: 10.1111/desc.13097. Online ahead of print.

Sequential Bayes Factor designs in developmental research: studies on early word 
learning.

Mani N(1)(2), Schreiner MS(1)(2)(3)(4), Brase J(1), Köhler K(1), Strassen K(1), 
Postin D(1), Schultze T(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Psychology of Language Department, University of Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Leibniz ScienceCampus "Primate Cognition", Germany.
(3)Clinic for Cognitive Neurology, University of Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Department of Neurology, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain 
Sciences, Germany.
(5)Department of Economic and Social Psychology, University of Göttingen, 
Germany.

Developmental research, like many fields, is plagued by low sample sizes and 
inconclusive findings. The problem is amplified by the difficulties associated 
with recruiting infant participants for research as well as the increased 
variability in infant responses. With sequential testing designs providing a 
viable alternative to paradigms facing such issues, the current study 
implemented a Sequential Bayes Factor design on three findings in the 
developmental literature. In particular, using the framework described by 
Schönbrödt and colleagues (2017), we examined infants' sensitivity to 
mispronunciations of familiar words, their learning of novel word-object 
associations from cross-situational learning paradigms, and their assumption of 
mutual exclusivity in assigning novel labels to novel objects. We tested an 
initial sample of 20 participants in each study, incrementally increasing sample 
size by one and computing a Bayes Factor with each additional participant. In 
one study, we were able to obtain moderate evidence for the alternate hypotheses 
despite testing less than half the number of participants as in the original 
study. We did not replicate the findings of the cross-situational learning 
study. Indeed, the data were five times more likely under the null hypothesis, 
allowing us to conclude that infants did not recognize the trained word-object 
associations presented in the task. We discuss these findings in light of the 
advantages and disadvantages of using a Sequential Bayes Factor design in 
developmental research while also providing researchers with an account of how 
we implemented this design across multiple studies.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13097
PMID: 33544976


492. Dev Sci. 2021 Feb 8:e13102. doi: 10.1111/desc.13102. Online ahead of print.

Communication changes when infants begin to walk.

West KL(1), Iverson JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, New York University.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh.

Learning to walk allows infants to travel faster and farther and explore more of 
their environments (e.g., Adolph & Tamis-LeMonda, 2012). In turn, walking may 
have a cascading effect on infants' communication and subsequent responses from 
caregivers. We tested for an inflection point-a dramatic shift in the 
developmental progression-in infant communication and caregiver responses when 
infants started walking. We followed 25 infants longitudinally over 7 months 
surrounding the onset of walking (Mean walk onset age = 11.76 months, SD = 
1.56). After learning to walk, the pace of gesture growth (but not vocalization 
growth) increased substantially, and infants increasingly coordinated gestures 
and vocalizations with locomotion (e.g., by walking to a caregiver and showing 
off a toy bear). Consequently, caregivers had more opportunities to respond 
contingently to their infants during walking months compared to crawling months 
(e.g., "What did you find? Is that your bear?"). Changes in communication were 
amplified for infants who began walking at older ages, compared to younger 
walkers. Findings suggest that learning to walk marks a point in development 
when infants actively communicate in new ways, and consequently elicit rich 
verbal input from caregivers.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13102
PMID: 33556219


493. Dev Sci. 2021 Feb 6:e13098. doi: 10.1111/desc.13098. Online ahead of print.

Caregivers use gesture contingently to support word learning.

Cheung RW(1), Hartley C(1), Monaghan P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Lancaster University, UK.
(2)University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Children learn words in environments where there is considerable variability, 
both in terms of the number of possible referents for novel words, and the 
availability of cues to support word-referent mappings. How caregivers adapt 
their gestural cues to referential uncertainty has not yet been explored. We 
tested a computational model of cross-situational word learning that examined 
the value of a variable gesture cue during training across conditions of varying 
referential uncertainty. We found that gesture had a greater benefit for 
referential uncertainty, but unexpectedly also found that learning was best when 
there was variability in both the environment (number of referents) and gestural 
cue use. We demonstrated that these results are reflected behaviourally in an 
experimental word learning study involving children aged 18-24-month-olds and 
their caregivers. Under similar conditions to the computational model, 
caregivers not only used gesture more when there were more potential referents 
for novel words, but children also learned best when there was some referential 
ambiguity for words. Thus, caregivers are sensitive to referential uncertainty 
in the environment and adapt their gestures accordingly, and children are able 
to respond to environmental variability to learn more robustly. These results 
imply that training under variable circumstances may actually benefit learning, 
rather than hinder it.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13098
PMID: 33550693


494. Dev Sci. 2018 Sep;21(5):e12640. doi: 10.1111/desc.12640. Epub 2017 Dec 29.

"Mummy, keep it steady": phonetic variation shapes word learning at 15 and 17 
months.

Escudero P(1), Mulak KE(1), Elvin J(1), Traynor NM(1).

Author information:
(1)The MARCS Institute for Brain, Behaviour and Development, ARC Centre of 
Excellence for the Dynamics of Language, Western Sydney University, Penrith, 
NSW, Australia.

Fifteen-month-olds have difficulty detecting differences between novel words 
differing in a single vowel. Previous work showed that Australian English (AusE) 
infants habituated to the word-object pair DEET detected an auditory switch to 
DIT and DOOT in Canadian English (CanE) but not in their native AusE (Escudero 
et al., ). The authors speculated that this may be because the vowel inherent 
spectral change variation (VISC) in AusE DEET is larger than in CanE DEET. We 
investigated whether VISC leads to difficulty in encoding phonetic detail during 
early word learning, and whether this difficulty dissipates with age. In 
Experiment 1, we familiarized AusE-learning 15-month-olds to AusE DIT, which 
contains smaller VISC than AusE DEET. Unlike infants familiarized with AusE DEET 
(Escudero et al., ), infants detected a switch to DEET and DOOT. In Experiment 
2, we familiarized AusE-learning 17-month-olds to AusE DEET. This time, infants 
detected a switch to DOOT, and marginally detected a switch to DIT. Our acoustic 
analysis showed that AusE DEET and DOOT are differentiated by the second vowel 
formant, while DEET and DIT can only be distinguished by their changing dynamic 
properties throughout the vowel trajectory. Thus, by 17 months, AusE infants can 
encode highly dynamic acoustic properties, enabling them to learn the novel 
vowel minimal pairs that are difficult at 15 months. These findings suggest that 
the development of word learning is shaped by the phonetic properties of the 
specific word minimal pair.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12640
PMID: 29285844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan 25:e13087. doi: 10.1111/desc.13087. Online ahead of print.

Does sticky mittens training facilitate reaching and grasping development?

van den Berg L(1), Gredebäck G(1).

Author information:
(1)Uppsala University, Department of Psychology, Uppsala, Sweden.

We are thankful for the commentaries on our review examining the sticky mittens 
research. The original authors created a training that is easy to administer and 
has potential long-term effects based on two weeks of exposure. We approached 
our review with enthusiasm for the paradigm and with the belief that the effects 
were clear and strong. To our surprise, the motor effects were not as strong as 
originally assumed. We noted several reasons for our cautious interpretation.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13087
PMID: 33492769


496. Dev Sci. 2021 Feb 11:e13104. doi: 10.1111/desc.13104. Online ahead of print.

The use of attention to maintain information in working memory: A developmental 
investigation of spontaneous refreshing in school-aged children.

Vergauwe E(1), Besch V(1), Latrèche C(1), Langerock N(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Geneva, Switzerland.

The capacity of working memory is limited and undergoes important developmental 
changes during childhood. One proposed reason for the expansion of working 
memory capacity during childhood is the emergence and increased efficiency of 
active maintenance mechanisms, such as that of refreshing. Refreshing is a 
proposed mechanism to keep information active in working memory by bringing 
memory items back into the focus of attention. One prevalent view is that the 
spontaneous use of refreshing emerges around the age of 7, and becomes more 
efficient during middle childhood and beyond. Using a novel approach to examine 
refreshing in children in Experiment 1, we show, against common conceptions, 
that simply giving free time in a basic working memory task does not lead to 
spontaneous refreshing in 9 to 12 year old children. Instead, their focus of 
attention appears to linger on the last-presented memory item, even when ample 
time for refreshing is provided. Experimentally imposing the use of refreshing 
in Experiment 2, however, showed that children in this age range are able to 
switch their focus of attention away from the last-presented item in order to 
switch to another memory item. Thus, the current study uncovers that children in 
middle childhood do not always spontaneously switch attention away from the 
last-presented memory item to refresh the entire list, even though they are able 
to switch attention away from the last-presented memory item when instructed to 
do so. The theoretical implications of these findings are discussed.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13104
PMID: 33570806


497. Dev Sci. 2021 Feb 7:e13099. doi: 10.1111/desc.13099. Online ahead of print.

Children's Altruism Following Acute Stress: The Role of Autonomic Nervous System 
Activity and Social Support.

Alen NV(1), Deer LK(1), Karimi M(1), Feyzieva E(1), Hastings PD(1), Hostinar 
CE(1).

Author information:
(1)Psychology Department and Center for Mind and Brain, University of 
California, Davis, USA.

Altruistic behavior after stress exposure may have important health and 
psychological benefits, in addition to broader societal consequences. However, 
so far experimental research on altruism following acute stress has been limited 
to adult populations. The current study utilized an experimental design to 
investigate how altruistic donation behavior among children may be influenced by 
(1) exposure to an acute social stressor, the Trier Social Stress Test modified 
for use with children (TSST-M), (2) individual differences in stress physiology, 
and (3) social support from a parent. The sample consisted of 180 children 
(54.9% male, 45.1% female; mean age = 9.92 years, SD = 0.56 years) randomly 
assigned to one of three conditions involving the TSST-M: (1) prepare for the 
TSST-M alone, (2) prepare for the TSST-M with a parent, and (3) no-stress 
control group. Results revealed that children made larger donations 
post-stressor if they were alone before the acute stressor, if they had moderate 
cardiac autonomic balance, reflecting both parasympathetic and sympathetic 
influence, and if they were older. Children who prepared for the TSST-M with 
social support from a parent made comparable donations as children in the 
no-stress control group, in accord with stress buffering models. Increased 
altruism following acute stress among children suggests that a comprehensive 
understanding of the human stress response needs to incorporate 
"tend-and-befriend" behavior - the tendency for humans to show increased 
altruistic behavior during times of distress.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13099
PMID: 33550679


498. Dev Sci. 2021 Feb 11:e13103. doi: 10.1111/desc.13103. Online ahead of print.

Bouncing the Network: A Dynamical Systems Model of Auditory-Vestibular 
Interactions Underlying Infants' Perception of Musical Rhythm.

Tichko P(1), Kim JC(2), Large EW(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Music, Northeastern University.
(2)Perception, Action, Cognition (PAC) Division, Department of Psychological 
Sciences, University of Connecticut.
(3)Center for the Ecological Study of Perception & Action (CESPA), Department of 
Psychological Sciences, University of Connecticut.
(4)Department of Physics, University of Connecticut.

Previous work suggests that auditory-vestibular interactions, which emerge 
during bodily movement to music, can influence the perception of musical rhythm. 
In a seminal study on the ontogeny of musical rhythm, Phillips-Silver & Trainor 
(2005) found that bouncing infants to an unaccented rhythm influenced infants' 
perceptual preferences for accented rhythms that matched the rate of bouncing. 
In the current study, we ask whether nascent, diffuse coupling between auditory 
and motor systems is sufficient to bootstrap short-term Hebbian plasticity in 
the auditory system and explain infants' preferences for accented rhythms 
thought to arise from auditory-vestibular interactions. First, we specify a 
nonlinear, dynamical system in which two oscillatory neural networks, 
representing developmentally nascent auditory and motor systems, interact 
through weak, non-specific coupling. The auditory network was equipped with 
short-term Hebbian plasticity, allowing the auditory network to tune its 
intrinsic resonant properties. Next, we simulate the effect of vestibular input 
(e.g., infant bouncing) on infants' perceptual preferences for accented rhythms. 
We found that simultaneous auditory-vestibular training shaped the model's 
response to musical rhythm, enhancing vestibular-related frequencies in 
auditory-network activity. Moreover, simultaneous auditory-vestibular training, 
relative to auditory- or vestibular-only training, facilitated short-term 
auditory plasticity in the model, producing stronger oscillator connections in 
the auditory network. Finally, when tested on a musical rhythm, models which 
received simultaneous auditory-vestibular training, but not models that received 
auditory- or vestibular-only training, resonated strongly at frequencies related 
to their "bouncing," a finding qualitatively similar to infants' preferences for 
accented rhythms that matched the rate of infant bouncing.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13103
PMID: 33570778


499. Dev Sci. 2021 Feb 5:e13096. doi: 10.1111/desc.13096. Online ahead of print.

Theory of Mind, Executive Function, and Lying in Children: A Meta-Analysis.

Sai L(1), Shang S(1), Tay C(2), Liu X(1), Sheng T(1), Fu G(1), Ding XP(2), Lee 
K(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychological Sciences, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, 
311121, China.
(2)Department of Psychology, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 
117570, Singapore.
(3)Department of Psychology, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, 321004, China.
(4)Dr. Eric Jackman Institute of Child Study, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
M5R 2X2, Ontario, Canada.

Scientific research on how children learn to tell lies has existed for more than 
a century. Earlier studies mainly focused on moral, social, and situational 
factors contributing to the development of lying. Researchers have only begun to 
explore the cognitive correlations of children's lying in the last two decades. 
Cognitive theories suggest that theory of mind (ToM) and executive function (EF) 
should be closely related to the development of lying since lying is, in 
essence, ToM and EF in action. Yet, findings from empirical studies are mixed. 
To address this issue, the current meta-analysis reviewed all prior literature 
that examined the relations between children's lying and ToM and/or between 
children's lying and EF. In total, 47 papers consisting of 5099 participants 
between 2 and 19 years of age were included, which yielded 74 effect sizes for 
ToM and 94 effect sizes for EF. Statistically significant but relatively small 
effects were found between children's lying and ToM (r = .17) and between lying 
and EF (r = .13). Further, EF's correlation with children's initial lies was 
significantly smaller than its correlation with their ability to maintain lies. 
This comprehensive meta-analysis provides a clear picture of the associations 
between children's ToM/EF and their lying behavior and confirms that ToM and EF 
indeed play a positive role in children's lying and its development.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13096
PMID: 33544950


500. Dev Sci. 2021 Feb 1:e13094. doi: 10.1111/desc.13094. Online ahead of print.

Home assessment of visual working memory in pre-schoolers reveals associations 
between behaviour, brain activation and parent reports of life stress.

McKay C(1), Lee Shing Y(2), Rafetseder E(1), Wijeakumar S(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Natural Sciences, University of Stirling, Psychology, Scotland, 
United Kingdom.
(2)Institute of Psychology, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany.
(3)School of Psychology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom.

Visual working memory (VWM) is reliably predictive of fluid intelligence and 
academic achievements. The objective of the current study was to investigate 
individual differences in pre-schoolers' VWM processing by examining the 
association between behaviour, brain function and parent-reported measures 
related to the child's environment. We used a portable functional near-infrared 
spectroscopy system to record from the frontal and parietal cortices of 
4.5-year-old children (N=74) as they completed a colour change-detection VWM 
task in their homes. Parents were asked to fill in questionnaires on 
temperament, academic aspirations, home environment, and life stress. Children 
were median-split into a low-performing (LP) and a high-performing (HP) group 
based on the number of items they could successfully remember during the task. 
LPs increasingly activated channels in the left frontal and bilateral parietal 
cortices with increasing load, whereas HPs showed no difference in activation. 
Our findings suggest that LPs recruited more neural resources than HPs when 
their VWM capacity was challenged. We employed mediation analyses to examine the 
association between the difference in activation between the highest and lowest 
loads and variables from the questionnaires. The difference in activation 
between loads in the left parietal cortex partially mediated the association 
between parent-reported stressful life events and VWM performance. Critically, 
our findings show that the association between VWM capacity, left parietal 
activation, and indicators of life stress is important to understand the nature 
of individual differences in VWM in pre-school children.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13094
PMID: 33523548


501. Dev Sci. 2017 Nov;20(6). doi: 10.1111/desc.12458. Epub 2016 Oct 17.

Numerical magnitude processing impairments in genetic syndromes: a 
cross-syndrome comparison of Turner and 22q11.2 deletion syndromes.

Brankaer C(1), Ghesquière P(1), De Wel A(2), Swillen A(3), De Smedt B(1).

Author information:
(1)Parenting and Special Education Research Unit, Faculty of Psychology and 
Educational Sciences, University of Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Center for Developmental Disorders, University Hospital Gasthuisberg, 
University of Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Center for Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Leuven, 
Belgium.

Cross-syndrome comparisons offer an important window onto understanding 
heterogeneity in mathematical learning disabilities or dyscalculia. The present 
study therefore investigated symbolic numerical magnitude processing in two 
genetic syndromes that are both characterized by mathematical learning 
disabilities: Turner syndrome and 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11DS). We 
further verified whether the phenotypic outcomes of these syndromes emerged from 
the same or different cognitive processes and therefore examined whether 
numerical impairments were related to working memory deficits, often observed in 
these syndromes. Participants were 24 girls with Turner syndrome, 25 children 
with 22q11DS and 48 well-matched typically developing control children. All 
children completed a symbolic numerical magnitude comparison task and four 
additional working memory tasks. Both groups of children with genetic syndromes 
showed similar impairments in symbolic numerical magnitude processing compared 
to typically developing controls. Importantly, in Turner syndrome, group 
differences in symbolic numerical magnitude processing disappeared when their 
difficulties in visual-spatial working memory were taken into account. In 
contrast, the difficulties in 22q11DS were not explained by poor visual-spatial 
working memory. These data suggest that different factors underlie the symbolic 
numerical magnitude processing impairments in both patient groups with 
mathematical learning disabilities and highlight the value of cross-syndrome 
comparisons for understanding different pathways to mathematical learning 
disabilities or dyscalculia.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12458
PMID: 27748007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


502. Dev Sci. 2017 Jan;20(1):10.1111/desc.12488. doi: 10.1111/desc.12488. Epub 2016 
Oct 16.

Post-conflict slowing effects in monolingual and bilingual children.

Grundy JG(1), Keyvani Chahi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, York University, Toronto, Canada.

Previous research has shown that bilingual children outperform their monolingual 
peers on a wide variety of tasks measuring executive functions (EF). However, 
recent failures to replicate this finding have cast doubt on the idea that the 
bilingual experience leads to domain-general cognitive benefits. The present 
study explored the role of disengagement of attention as an explanation for why 
some studies fail to produce this result. Eighty children (40 monolingual, 40 
bilingual) who were 7 years old performed a task-switching experiment. In the 
pure blocks, three simple non-conflict tasks were performed in which children 
responded by pressing one of two response keys. In the conflict block, 
occasional bivalent stimuli appeared and created conflict because the irrelevant 
dimension was mapped to the incorrect response key. The results showed that 
these bivalent stimuli affected subsequent performance in the conflict block. 
For monolinguals, the effect of conflict was found for up to 12 trials after the 
appearance of the bivalent stimulus, but for bilinguals the effect disappeared 
after only two trials. The results are interpreted as evidence for faster 
disengagement of attention by bilingual children. Most studies examining EF in 
monolingual and bilingual children do not examine trial-by-trial adjustments 
following conflict, but these are essential considerations because relevant 
processing differences are masked when analyses are applied to data averaged 
across entire blocks.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12488
PMCID: PMC5199612
PMID: 27748005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


503. Dev Sci. 2017 Nov;20(6):e12462. doi: 10.1111/desc.12462. Epub 2016 Oct 16.

Navigating through apertures: perceptual judgements and actions of children with 
Developmental Coordination Disorder.

Wilmut K(1), Du W(2), Barnett AL(1).

Author information:
(1)Perception and Motion Analysis Lab, Department of Psychology, Social Work and 
Public Health, Oxford Brookes University, UK.
(2)Division of Psychology, Nottingham Trent University, UK.

Passing through a narrow gap/aperture involves a perceptual judgement regarding 
the size of the gap and an action to pass through. Children with DCD are known 
to have difficulties with perceptual judgements in near space but whether this 
extends to far space is unknown. Furthermore, in a recent study it was found 
that adults with DCD do not scale movements when walking through an aperture in 
the same way as their peers. The current study, therefore, considered perceptual 
judgements and motor behaviour of children with DCD while looking at or walking 
through apertures. Twenty-nine children with DCD and 29 typically developing 
(TD) children took part. In Experiment 1, participants completed a perceptual 
task, where they made passability judgements. Children with DCD showed a 
significantly smaller critical ratio (aperture size at which a participant first 
rotates the shoulders to pass through) compared to their TD peers. In Experiment 
2, participants completed an action task where they walked through the same 
apertures. Children with DCD showed a significantly larger critical ratio than 
TD peers when body size alone was accounted for. Taken together these results 
suggest that perception within a static context is different from that within a 
dynamic context for children with DCD. However, despite this difference we have 
demonstrated a clear relationship between perception and action in children with 
DCD. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at: 
https://youtu.be/SABXFrAJtF8.

© 2016 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12462
PMCID: PMC5697666
PMID: 27747996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


504. Dev Sci. 2017 Sep;20(5):10.1111/desc.12474. doi: 10.1111/desc.12474. Epub 2016 
Oct 16.

Across space and time: infants learn from backward and forward visual 
statistics.

Tummeltshammer K(1), Amso D(1), French RM(2), Kirkham NZ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, & Psychological Sciences, Brown 
University, USA.
(2)CNRS-LEAD, Université de Bourgogne, France.
(3)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Birkbeck, University of London, 
UK.

This study investigates whether infants are sensitive to backward and forward 
transitional probabilities within temporal and spatial visual streams. Two 
groups of 8-month-old infants were familiarized with an artificial grammar of 
shapes, comprising backward and forward base pairs (i.e. two shapes linked by 
strong backward or forward transitional probability) and part-pairs (i.e. two 
shapes with weak transitional probabilities in both directions). One group 
viewed the continuous visual stream as a temporal sequence, while the other 
group viewed the same stream as a spatial array. Following familiarization, 
infants looked longer at test trials containing part-pairs than base pairs, 
although they had appeared with equal frequency during familiarization. This 
pattern of looking time was evident for both forward and backward pairs, in both 
the temporal and spatial conditions. Further, differences in looking time to 
part-pairs that were consistent or inconsistent with the predictive direction of 
the base pairs (forward or backward) indicated that infants were indeed 
sensitive to direction when presented with temporal sequences, but not when 
presented with spatial arrays. These results suggest that visual statistical 
learning is flexible in infancy and depends on the nature of visual input.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12474
PMCID: PMC5392435
PMID: 27747976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


505. Dev Sci. 2017 Nov;20(6). doi: 10.1111/desc.12469. Epub 2016 Sep 22.

Comparing single- and dual-process models of memory development.

Hayes BK(1), Dunn JC(2), Joubert A(1), Taylor R(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of New South Wales, Australia.
(2)School of Psychology, The University of Adelaide, Australia.

This experiment examined single-process and dual-process accounts of the 
development of visual recognition memory. The participants, 6-7-year-olds, 
9-10-year-olds and adults, were presented with a list of pictures which they 
encoded under shallow or deep conditions. They then made recognition and 
confidence judgments about a list containing old and new items. We replicated 
the main trends reported by Ghetti and Angelini () in that recognition hit rates 
increased from 6 to 9 years of age, with larger age changes following deep than 
shallow encoding. Formal versions of the dual-process high threshold signal 
detection model and several single-process models (equal variance signal 
detection, unequal variance signal detection, mixture signal detection) were fit 
to the developmental data. The unequal variance and mixture signal detection 
models gave a better account of the data than either of the other models. A 
state-trace analysis found evidence for only one underlying memory process 
across the age range tested. These results suggest that single-process memory 
models based on memory strength are a viable alternative to dual-process models 
for explaining memory development.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12469
PMID: 27659763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


506. Dev Sci. 2017 Jul;20(4). doi: 10.1111/desc.12460. Epub 2016 Sep 22.

Exploring the evolutionary origins of overimitation: a comparison across 
domesticated and non-domesticated canids.

Johnston AM(1), Holden PC(1), Santos LR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, USA.

When learning from others, human children tend to faithfully copy - or 
'overimitate' - the actions of a demonstrator, even when these actions are 
irrelevant for solving the task at hand. We investigate whether domesticated 
dogs (Canis familiaris) and dingoes (Canis dingo) share this tendency to 
overimitate in three experiments. In Experiment 1, dogs and dingoes had the 
opportunity to solve a puzzle after watching an ostensive demonstrator who used 
both a relevant action and an irrelevant action. We find clear evidence against 
overimitation in both species. In contrast to human children (Horner & Whiten, 
2005), dogs and dingoes used the irrelevant action less often across trials, 
suggesting that both species were filtering out the irrelevant action as they 
gained experience with the puzzle (like chimpanzees; Horner & Whiten, 2005). 
Experiments 2 and 3 provide further evidence against overimitation, 
demonstrating that both species' behavior is better characterized by individual 
exploration than overimitation. Given that both species, particularly dogs, show 
human-like social learning in other contexts, these findings provide additional 
evidence that overimitation may be a unique aspect of human social learning. A 
video abstract of this article can be viewed at: https://youtu.be/g2mRniJZ7aU.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12460
PMID: 27659592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


507. Dev Sci. 2017 Sep;20(5):10.1111/desc.12447. doi: 10.1111/desc.12447. Epub 2016 
Aug 29.

Action mechanisms for social cognition: behavioral and neural correlates of 
developing Theory of Mind.

Bowman LC(1), Thorpe SG(2), Cannon EN(2), Fox NA(2).

Author information:
(1)Harvard Medical School, Boston Children's Hospital, USA.
(2)Department of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology, University of 
Maryland, USA.

Many psychological theories posit foundational links between two fundamental 
constructs: (1) our ability to produce, perceive, and represent action; and (2) 
our ability to understand the meaning and motivation behind the action (i.e. 
Theory of Mind; ToM). This position is contentious, however, and long-standing 
competing theories of social-cognitive development debate roles for basic 
action-processing in ToM. Developmental research is key to investigating these 
hypotheses, but whether individual differences in neural and behavioral measures 
of motor action relate to social-cognitive development is unknown. We examined 
3- to 5-year-old children's (N = 26) EEG mu-desynchronization during production 
of object-directed action, and explored associations between 
mu-desynchronization and children's behavioral motor skills, behavioral 
action-representation abilities, and behavioral ToM. For children with high (but 
not low) mu-desynchronization, motor skill related to action-representation 
abilities, and action-representation mediated relations between motor skill and 
ToM. Results demonstrate novel foundational links between action-processing and 
ToM, suggesting that basic motor action may be a key mechanism for 
social-cognitive development, thus shedding light on the origins and emergence 
of higher social cognition.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12447
PMCID: PMC5332397
PMID: 27573916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


508. Dev Sci. 2017 Sep;20(5). doi: 10.1111/desc.12437. Epub 2016 Aug 21.

Eighteen-month-old infants show distinct electrophysiological responses to their 
own faces.

Stapel JC(1), van Wijk I(1), Bekkering H(1), Hunnius S(1).

Author information:
(1)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Infants attain the developmental milestone of self-recognition around 18 to 
24 months of age. At 18 months of age, half of the infant population typically 
shows signs of self-recognition in the classic mirror test. The current study 
examined the functional neural correlates of the perception of self in infancy. 
Eighteen-month-old infants observed photographs of their own face, the face of 
an unfamiliar infant, the face of their caregiver, and the face of an unfamiliar 
caregiver, while their EEG was registered. The results show that infants show an 
enhanced response to their own face compared to other faces. The N290, an 
established face-selective ERP component in infants, was larger for observation 
of their own face compared to others' faces. In addition to the EEG task, the 
mirror test was administered. Half of the infants in our sample recognized 
themselves in the mirror. However, there were no differences in the ERP 
responses between the infants who did and did not recognize themselves in the 
mirror. This suggests that a distinction between the neural response to self and 
to others does not necessarily express itself in self-recognition behavior.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12437
PMID: 27546355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


509. Dev Sci. 2017 Sep;20(5):10.1111/desc.12436. doi: 10.1111/desc.12436. Epub 2016 
Aug 6.

Intergenerational associations in numerical approximation and mathematical 
abilities.

Braham EJ(1), Libertus ME(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Learning Research and Development Center, 
University of Pittsburgh, USA.

Although growing evidence suggests a link between children's math skills and 
their ability to estimate numerical quantities using the approximate number 
system (ANS), little is known about the sources underlying individual 
differences in ANS acuity and their relation with specific mathematical skills. 
To examine the role of intergenerational transmission of these abilities from 
parents to children, the current study assessed the ANS acuities and math 
abilities of 54 children (5-8 years old) and their parents, as well as parents' 
expectations about children's math skills. Children's ANS acuity positively 
correlated with their parents' ANS acuity, and children's math abilities were 
predicted by unique combinations of parents' ANS acuity and math ability 
depending on the specific math skill in question. These findings provide the 
first evidence of intergenerational transmission of an unlearned, non-verbal 
numerical competence and are an important step toward understanding the 
multifaceted parental influences on children's math abilities.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12436
PMCID: PMC6035787
PMID: 27496658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


510. Dev Sci. 2017 Jul;20(4). doi: 10.1111/desc.12430. Epub 2016 Jul 14.

Baby FaceTime: can toddlers learn from online video chat?

Myers LJ(1), LeWitt RB(1), Gallo RE(1), Maselli NM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Lafayette College, USA.

There is abundant evidence for the 'video deficit': children under 2 years old 
learn better in person than from video. We evaluated whether these findings 
applied to video chat by testing whether children aged 12-25 months could form 
relationships with and learn from on-screen partners. We manipulated social 
contingency: children experienced either real-time FaceTime conversations or 
pre-recorded Videos as the partner taught novel words, actions and patterns. 
Children were attentive and responsive in both conditions, but only children in 
the FaceTime group responded to the partner in a temporally synced manner. After 
one week, children in the FaceTime condition (but not the Video condition) 
preferred and recognized their Partner, learned more novel patterns, and the 
oldest children learned more novel words. Results extend previous studies to 
demonstrate that children under 2 years show social and cognitive learning from 
video chat because it retains social contingency. A video abstract of this 
article can be viewed at: https://youtu.be/rTXaAYd5adA.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12430
PMID: 27417537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


511. Dev Sci. 2016 Jul;19(4):673-85. doi: 10.1111/desc.12428.

Reading skill-fractional anisotropy relationships in visuospatial tracts diverge 
depending on socioeconomic status.

Gullick MM(1)(2), Demir-Lira ÖE(1)(3), Booth JR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Roxelyn and Richard Pepper Department of Communication Sciences and 
Disorders, Northwestern University, USA.
(2)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, University of Texas at 
Austin, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, USA.

Low socioeconomic status (SES) has been repeatedly linked with decreased 
academic achievement, including lower reading outcomes. Some lower SES children 
do show skills and scores commensurate with those of their higher SES peers, but 
whether their abilities stem from the same systems as high SES children or are 
based on divergent strategies is unknown. We here investigated a potential 
interactive relationship between SES and real-word reading skill in the white 
matter in 42 typically developing children. SES was determined based on parental 
education; reading skill and age were not significantly related to SES. There 
was a significant neural interaction: Clusters in the bilateral inferior 
longitudinal fasciculus (ILF), left superior longitudinal fasciculus, and left 
corticospinal tract demonstrated interactive skill-SES relationships in 
fractional anisotropy. Follow-up analyses demonstrated that higher SES children 
showed a positive relationship between fractional anisotropy, reflecting tract 
coherence, and reading skill in left hemisphere tract clusters, whereas lower 
SES children showed a positive relationship in the right hemisphere homologues. 
Broadly, the ILF has been demonstrated to support orthographic skill on the left 
and more general visuospatial processing on the right, so high reading 
achievement in lower SES children may rely on supplementary visuospatial 
processing more than for higher SES readers. This pattern is consistent with 
previous work reporting low SES children's environments to include less rich 
verbal experience, which may lead them to disproportionately draw on 
visuospatial skills for success. Further, these results indicate that group SES 
differences may be best described by an adaptive, not a deficit, model.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12428
PMCID: PMC5995108
PMID: 27412229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


512. Dev Sci. 2017 Nov;20(6). doi: 10.1111/desc.12439. Epub 2016 Jun 19.

Part-based representations of the body in early childhood: evidence from 
perceived distortions of tactile space across limb boundaries.

Le Cornu Knight F(1), Cowie D(2), Bremner AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Sensorimotor Development Research Unit, Department of Psychology, Goldsmiths, 
University of London, UK.
(2)Department of Psychology, Durham University, UK.

Studies show that touch in adults is referenced to a representation of the body 
that is structured topologically according to body parts; the perceived distance 
between two stimuli crossing over a body part boundary is elongated relative to 
the perceived distance between two stimuli presented within one body part 
category. Here we investigate this influence of body parts on tactile space 
perception in children of 5, 6 and 7 years of age. We presented children with 
pairs of tactile stimuli on the left hand/arm, either within the hand, within 
the forearm, or over the wrist. With their eyes closed children were asked to 
adjust the distance between the thumb and forefinger of their right hand to 
represent the felt distance between the two tactile stimuli. Like adults, the 
children perceived the distance between two stimuli that cross the body part 
boundary to be further apart than those that were presented within the hand or 
arm. They also perceive tactile distance to be greater on the hand than the arm 
which is the first observation of Weber's illusion in young children. We propose 
that a topological mode of body representation is particularly advantageous 
during early life given that body part categories remain constant while the 
metric proportions of the body change substantially as the child grows.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12439
PMID: 27321051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


513. Dev Sci. 2017 Sep;20(5):e12432. doi: 10.1111/desc.12432. Epub 2016 Jun 19.

Parent- and child-driven effects during the transition to adolescence: a 
longitudinal, genetic analysis of the home environment.

Hannigan LJ(1), McAdams TA(1), Plomin R(1), Eley TC(1).

Author information:
(1)King's College London, UK.

Theoretical models of child development typically consider the home environment 
as a product of bidirectional effects, with parent- and child-driven processes 
operating interdependently. However, the developmental structure of these 
processes during the transition from childhood to adolescence has not been well 
studied. In this study we used longitudinal genetic analyses of data from 6646 
UK-representative twin pairs (aged 9-16 years) to investigate stability and 
change in parenting and household chaos in the context of parent-child 
bidirectional effects. Stability in the home environment was modest, arising 
mainly from parent-driven processes and family-wide influences. In contrast, 
change over time was more influenced by child-driven processes, indicated by 
significant age-specific genetic influences. Interpretations of these results 
and their implications for researchers are discussed.

© 2016 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12432
PMCID: PMC5599952
PMID: 27320336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


514. Dev Sci. 2017 Mar;20(2):e12431. doi: 10.1111/desc.12431. Epub 2016 May 19.

The role of learning in social development: Illustrations from neglected 
children.

Wismer Fries AB(1), Pollak SD(1).

Author information:
(1)Waisman Center and Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
USA.

Children who experience early caregiving neglect are very likely to have 
problems developing and maintaining relationships and regulating their social 
behavior. One of the earliest manifestations of this problem is reflected in 
indiscriminate behavior, a phenomenon where young children do not show normative 
wariness of strangers or use familiar adults as sources of security. To better 
understand the developmental mechanisms underlying the emergence of these 
problems, this study examined whether institutionally reared children, who 
experienced early social neglect, had difficulty associating motivational 
significance to visual stimuli. Pairing stimuli with motivational significance 
is presumably one of the associative learning processes involved in establishing 
discriminate or selective relationships with others. We found that early 
experiences of neglectful caregiving were associated with difficulties in 
acquiring such associations, and that delays in this developmental skill were 
related to children's social difficulties. These data suggest a way in which 
early social learning experiences may impact the development of processes 
underlying emotional development.

© 2016 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12431
PMCID: PMC5347966
PMID: 27197841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


515. Dev Sci. 2016 Jul;19(4):599-612. doi: 10.1111/desc.12424. Epub 2016 May 4.

Neural signature of developmental coordination disorder in the structural 
connectome independent of comorbid autism.

Caeyenberghs K(1)(2), Taymans T(3), Wilson PH(1), Vanderstraeten G(3), Hosseini 
H(4), van Waelvelde H(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Faculty of Health Sciences, Australian Catholic 
University, Australia.
(2)School of Psychological Sciences, Monash Biomedical Imaging lab, Monash 
University, Australia.
(3)Department of Physical Therapy and Motor Rehabilitation, Faculty of Medicine 
and Health Sciences, University of Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, School of Medicine, 
Stanford University, USA.

Children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) often exhibit motor clumsiness 
(Developmental Coordination Disorder, DCD), i.e. they struggle with everyday 
tasks that require motor coordination like dressing, self-care, and 
participating in sport and leisure activities. Previous studies in these 
neurodevelopmental disorders have demonstrated functional abnormalities and 
alterations of white matter microstructural integrity in specific brain regions. 
These findings suggest that the global organization of brain networks is 
affected in DCD and ASD and support the hypothesis of a 'dys-connectivity 
syndrome' from a network perspective. No studies have compared the structural 
covariance networks between ASD and DCD in order to look for the signature of 
DCD independent of comorbid autism. Here, we aimed to address the question of 
whether abnormal connectivity in DCD overlaps that seen in autism or comorbid 
DCD-autism. Using graph theoretical analysis, we investigated differences in 
global and regional topological properties of structural brain networks in 53 
children: 8 ASD children with DCD (DCD+ASD), 15 ASD children without DCD (ASD), 
11 with DCD only, and 19 typically developing (TD) children. We constructed 
separate structural correlation networks based on cortical thickness derived 
from Freesurfer. The children were assessed on the Movement-ABC and the Beery 
Test of Visual Motor Integration. Behavioral results demonstrated that the DCD 
group and DCD+ASD group scored on average poorer than the TD and ASD groups on 
various motor measures. Furthermore, although the brain networks of all groups 
exhibited small-world properties, the topological architecture of the networks 
was significantly altered in children with ASD compared with DCD and TD. ASD 
children showed increased normalized path length and higher values of clustering 
coefficient. Also, paralimbic regions exhibited nodal clustering coefficient 
alterations in singular disorders. These changes were disorder-specific, and 
included alterations in clustering coefficient in the isthmus of the right 
cingulate gyrus and the pars orbitalis of the right inferior frontal gyrus in 
ASD children, and DCD-related increases in the lateral orbitofrontal cortex. 
Children meeting criteria for both DCD and ASD exhibited topological changes 
that were more widespread from those seen in children with only DCD, i.e. 
children with DCD+ASD showed alterations of clustering coefficient in 
(para)limbic regions, primary areas, and association areas. The DCD+ASD group 
showed changes in clustering coefficient in the left association cortex relative 
to the ASD group. Finally, the DCD+ASD group shared ASD-specific abnormalities 
in the pars orbitalis of right inferior frontal gyrus, which was hypothesized to 
reflect atypical emotional-cognitive processing. Our results provide evidence 
that DCD and ASD are neurodevelopmental disorders with a low degree of overlap 
in abnormalities in connectivity. The co-occurrence of DCD+ASD was also 
associated with a distinct topological pattern, highlighting the unique neural 
signature of comorbid neurodevelopmental disorders.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12424
PMID: 27147441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


516. Dev Sci. 2016 May;19(3):341-61. doi: 10.1111/desc.12395.

Magnitude knowledge: the common core of numerical development.

Siegler RS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Carnegie Mellon University, USA.
(2)Siegler Center for Innovative Learning, Beijing Normal University, China.

The integrated theory of numerical development posits that a central theme of 
numerical development from infancy to adulthood is progressive broadening of the 
types and ranges of numbers whose magnitudes are accurately represented. The 
process includes four overlapping trends: (1) representing increasingly 
precisely the magnitudes of non-symbolic numbers, (2) connecting small symbolic 
numbers to their non-symbolic referents, (3) extending understanding from 
smaller to larger whole numbers, and (4) accurately representing the magnitudes 
of rational numbers. The present review identifies substantial commonalities, as 
well as differences, in these four aspects of numerical development. With both 
whole and rational numbers, numerical magnitude knowledge is concurrently 
correlated with, longitudinally predictive of, and causally related to multiple 
aspects of mathematical understanding, including arithmetic and overall math 
achievement. Moreover, interventions focused on increasing numerical magnitude 
knowledge often generalize to other aspects of mathematics. The cognitive 
processes of association and analogy seem to play especially large roles in this 
development. Thus, acquisition of numerical magnitude knowledge can be seen as 
the common core of numerical development.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12395
PMID: 27074723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


517. Dev Sci. 2017 Jul;20(4):10.1111/desc.12413. doi: 10.1111/desc.12413. Epub 2016 
Apr 7.

Preliminary evidence of the impact of early childhood maltreatment and a 
preventive intervention on neural patterns of response inhibition in early 
adolescence.

Jankowski KF(1), Bruce J(2), Beauchamp KG(1), Roos LE(1), Moore WE 3rd(1), 
Fisher PA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Oregon, USA.
(2)Oregon Social Learning Center, USA.

Maltreated youths in foster care often experience negative developmental and 
psychological outcomes, which have been linked with poor response inhibition. 
Recent evidence suggests that childhood maltreatment is also associated with 
alterations in the neural circuitry underlying response inhibition. However, a 
burgeoning line of research has begun to explore the mitigating effects of 
preventive interventions on neural functioning. The current study used 
event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging to explore the impact of 
early childhood maltreatment and a preventive intervention on response 
inhibition in early adolescence. Thirty-six demographically similar adolescents 
(ages 9-14 years) completed a Go/NoGo task. The sample included nonmaltreated 
adolescents (n = 14) and maltreated adolescents who were in foster care as 
preschoolers and randomly assigned to receive services as usual (n = 11) or a 
preventive intervention, Multidimensional Treatment Foster Care for Preschoolers 
(n = 11). The groups demonstrated similar behavioral performance but 
significantly different neural patterns. The maltreated adolescents who received 
services as usual demonstrated subcortical hypoactivity during successful 
response inhibition and subcortical hyperactivity during unsuccessful response 
inhibition. In contrast, the nonmaltreated adolescents and maltreated 
adolescents who received the intervention exhibited strikingly similar neural 
patterns during successful response inhibition, but the maltreated adolescents 
who received the intervention demonstrated prefrontal hypoactivity during 
unsuccessful response inhibition. These findings offer preliminary evidence that 
early childhood maltreatment alters the neural patterns underlying response 
inhibition in early adolescence and that participating in a preventive 
intervention could mitigate maltreatment-related effects on these neural 
systems.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12413
PMCID: PMC5055407
PMID: 27061609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


518. Dev Sci. 2017 Jul;20(4). doi: 10.1111/desc.12394. Epub 2016 Feb 21.

Visual cues of motion that trigger animacy perception at birth: the case of 
self-propulsion.

Di Giorgio E(1), Lunghi M(2), Simion F(2)(3), Vallortigara G(1).

Author information:
(1)CIMeC, Center for Mind/Brain Sciences, University of Trento, Italy.
(2)DPSS, Department of Developmental and Social Psychology, University of 
Padova, Italy.
(3)Cognitive Neuroscience Center, University of Padova, Italy.

Self-propelled motion is a powerful cue that conveys information that an object 
is animate. In this case, animate refers to an entity's capacity to initiate 
motion without an applied external force. Sensitivity to this motion cue is 
present in infants that are a few months old, but whether this sensitivity is 
experience-dependent or is already present at birth is unknown. Here, we tested 
newborns to examine whether predispositions to process self-produced motion cues 
underlying animacy perception were present soon after birth. We systematically 
manipulated the onset of motion by self-propulsion (Experiment 1) and the change 
in trajectory direction in the presence or absence of direct contact with an 
external object (Experiments 2 and 3) to investigate how these motion cues 
determine preference in newborns. Overall, data demonstrated that, at least at 
birth, the self-propelled onset of motion is a crucial visual cue that allowed 
newborns to differentiate between self- and non-self-propelled objects 
(Experiment 1) because when this cue was removed, newborns did not manifest any 
visual preference (Experiment 2), even if they were able to discriminate between 
the stimuli (Experiment 3). To our knowledge, this is the first study aimed at 
identifying sensitivity in human newborns to the most basic and rudimentary 
motion cues that reliably trigger perceptions of animacy in adults. Our findings 
are compatible with the hypothesis of the existence of inborn predispositions to 
visual cues of motion that trigger animacy perception in adults.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12394
PMID: 26898995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


519. Dev Sci. 2016 Jul;19(4):613-31. doi: 10.1111/desc.12399. Epub 2016 Feb 14.

Parietal hyper-connectivity, aberrant brain organization, and circuit-based 
biomarkers in children with mathematical disabilities.

Jolles D(1)(2), Ashkenazi S(1)(3), Kochalka J(1), Evans T(1), Richardson J(1), 
Rosenberg-Lee M(1), Zhao H(1), Supekar K(1), Chen T(1), Menon V(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, USA.
(2)Education and Child Studies, Leiden University, The Netherlands.
(3)School of Education, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel.
(4)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, USA.

Mathematical disabilities (MD) have a negative life-long impact on professional 
success, employment, and health outcomes. Yet little is known about the 
intrinsic functional brain organization that contributes to poor math skills in 
affected children. It is now increasingly recognized that math cognition 
requires coordinated interaction within a large-scale fronto-parietal network 
anchored in the intraparietal sulcus (IPS). Here we characterize intrinsic 
functional connectivity within this IPS-network in children with MD, relative to 
a group of typically developing (TD) children who were matched on age, gender, 
IQ, working memory, and reading abilities. Compared to TD children, children 
with MD showed hyper-connectivity of the IPS with a bilateral fronto-parietal 
network. Importantly, aberrant IPS connectivity patterns accurately 
discriminated children with MD and TD children, highlighting the possibility for 
using IPS connectivity as a brain-based biomarker of MD. To further investigate 
regional abnormalities contributing to network-level deficits in children with 
MD, we performed whole-brain analyses of intrinsic low-frequency fluctuations. 
Notably, children with MD showed higher low-frequency fluctuations in multiple 
fronto-parietal areas that overlapped with brain regions that exhibited 
hyper-connectivity with the IPS. Taken together, our findings suggest that MD in 
children is characterized by robust network-level aberrations, and is not an 
isolated dysfunction of the IPS. We hypothesize that intrinsic 
hyper-connectivity and enhanced low-frequency fluctuations may limit flexible 
resource allocation, and contribute to aberrant recruitment of task-related 
brain regions during numerical problem solving in children with MD.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12399
PMCID: PMC4945407
PMID: 26874919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


520. Dev Sci. 2017 May;20(3). doi: 10.1111/desc.12402. Epub 2016 Feb 2.

Implicit expectations influence target detection in children and adults.

Ruhnau P(1), Schröger E(2), Sussman ES(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cognitive Neuroscience, Paris-Lodron-Universität Salzburg, 
Austria.
(2)Institute of Psychology, University of Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, USA.

When a sound occurs at a predictable time, it gets processed more efficiently. 
Predictability of the temporal structure of acoustic inflow has been found to 
influence the P3b of event-related potentials in young adults, such that highly 
predictable compared to less predictable input leads to earlier P3b peak 
latencies. In our study, we wanted to investigate the influence of 
predictability on target processing indexed by the P3b in children (10-12 years 
old) and young adults. To do that, we used an oddball paradigm with two 
conditions of predictability (high and low). In the High-predictability 
condition, a high-pitched target tone occurred most of the time in the fifth 
position of a five-tone pattern (after four low-pitched non-target sounds), 
whereas in the Low-predictability condition, no such rule was implemented. The 
target tone occurred randomly following 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 non-target tones. In 
both age groups, reaction time to predictable targets was faster than to 
non-predictable targets. Remarkably, this effect was largest in children. 
Consistent with the behavioral responses, the onset latency of the P3b response 
elicited by targets in both groups was earlier in the predictable than the 
unpredictable conditions. However, only the children had significantly earlier 
peak latency responses for predictable targets. Our results demonstrate that 
target stimulus predictability increases processing speed in children and adults 
even when predictability was only implicitly derived by the stimulus statistics. 
Children did have larger effects of predictability, seeming to benefit more from 
predictability for target detection.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12402
PMID: 26841104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


521. Dev Sci. 2017 May;20(3). doi: 10.1111/desc.12379. Epub 2016 Jan 6.

The role of early visual input in the development of contour interpolation: the 
case of subjective contours.

Hadad BS(1), Maurer D(2), Lewis TL(2).

Author information:
(1)Edmond J. Safra Brain Research Center, Department of Special Education, 
University of Haifa, Israel.
(2)Visual Development Lab, McMaster University, Canada.

We tested the effect of early monocular and binocular deprivation of normal 
visual input on the development of contour interpolation. Patients deprived from 
birth by dense central cataracts in one or both eyes, and age-matched controls, 
discriminated between fat and thin shapes formed by either illusory or 
luminance-defined contours. Thresholds indicated the minimum amount of curvature 
(the fatness or thinness) required for discrimination of the illusory shape, 
providing a measure of the precision of interpolation. The results show that 
individuals deprived of visual input in one eye, but not those deprived in both 
eyes, later show deficits in perceptual interpolation. The deficits were shown 
mostly for weakly supported contours in which interpolation of contours between 
the inducers was over a large distance relative to the size of the inducers. 
Deficits shown for the unilateral but not for the bilateral patients point to 
the detrimental effect of unequal competition between the eyes for cortical 
connections on the later development of the mechanisms underlying contour 
interpolation.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12379
PMID: 26743221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


522. Dev Sci. 2017 May;20(3):10.1111/desc.12377. doi: 10.1111/desc.12377. Epub 2016 
Jan 6.

Bilingualism alters children's frontal lobe functioning for attentional control.

Arredondo MM(1), Hu XS(2), Satterfield T(2)(3), Kovelman I(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, USA.
(2)Center for Human Growth and Development, University of Michigan, USA.
(3)Department of Romance Languages and Literatures, University of Michigan, USA.

Bilingualism is a typical linguistic experience, yet relatively little is known 
about its impact on children's cognitive and brain development. Theories of 
bilingualism suggest that early dual-language acquisition can improve children's 
cognitive abilities, specifically those relying on frontal lobe functioning. 
While behavioral findings present much conflicting evidence, little is known 
about its effects on children's frontal lobe development. Using functional 
near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS), the findings suggest that Spanish-English 
bilingual children (n = 13, ages 7-13) had greater activation in left prefrontal 
cortex during a non-verbal attentional control task relative to age-matched 
English monolinguals. In contrast, monolinguals (n = 14) showed greater right 
prefrontal activation than bilinguals. The present findings suggest that early 
bilingualism yields significant changes to the functional organization of 
children's prefrontal cortex for attentional control and carry implications for 
understanding how early life experiences impact cognition and brain development.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12377
PMCID: PMC5376242
PMID: 26743118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


523. Dev Sci. 2017 Mar;20(2):e12383. doi: 10.1111/desc.12383. Epub 2015 Dec 22.

A cross-syndrome study of the differential effects of sleep on declarative 
memory consolidation in children with neurodevelopmental disorders.

Ashworth A(1), Hill CM(2), Karmiloff-Smith A(3), Dimitriou D(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Research in Psychology, Behaviour and Achievement, Coventry 
University, UK.
(2)Clinical Experimental Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Southampton, UK.
(3)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Birkbeck, University of London, 
UK.
(4)Lifespan Learning and Sleep Laboratory, UCL, Institute of Education, UK.

Sleep plays an active role in memory consolidation. Because children with Down 
syndrome (DS) and Williams syndrome (WS) experience significant problems with 
sleep and also with learning, we predicted that sleep-dependent memory 
consolidation would be impaired in these children when compared to typically 
developing (TD) children. This is the first study to provide a cross-syndrome 
comparison of sleep-dependent learning in school-aged children. Children with DS 
(n = 20) and WS (n = 22) and TD children (n = 33) were trained on the novel 
Animal Names task where they were taught pseudo-words as the personal names of 
ten farm and domestic animals, e.g. Basco the cat, with the aid of animal 
picture flashcards. They were retested following counterbalanced retention 
intervals of wake and sleep. Overall, TD children remembered significantly more 
words than both the DS and WS groups. In addition, their performance improved 
following night-time sleep, whereas performance over the wake retention interval 
remained stable, indicating an active role of sleep for memory consolidation. 
Task performance of children with DS did not significantly change following wake 
or sleep periods. However, children with DS who were initially trained in the 
morning continued to improve on the task at the following retests, so that 
performance on the final test was greater for children who had initially trained 
in the morning than those who trained in the evening. Children with WS improved 
on the task between training and the first retest, regardless of whether sleep 
or wake occurred during the retention interval. This suggests time-dependent 
rather than sleep-dependent learning in children with WS, or tiredness at the 
end of the first session and better performance once refreshed at the start of 
the second session, irrespective of the time of day. Contrary to expectations, 
sleep-dependent learning was not related to baseline level of performance. The 
findings have significant implications for educational strategies, and suggest 
that children with DS should be taught more important or difficult information 
in the morning when they are better able to learn, whilst children with WS 
should be allowed a time delay between learning phases to allow for 
time-dependent memory consolidation, and frequent breaks from learning so that 
they are refreshed and able to perform at their best.

© 2015 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12383
PMCID: PMC5347847
PMID: 26690566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


524. Dev Sci. 2017 May;20(3):10.1111/desc.12380. doi: 10.1111/desc.12380. Epub 2015 
Dec 21.

Development in reading and math in children from different SES backgrounds: the 
moderating role of child temperament.

Wang Z(1), Soden B(2), Deater-Deckard K(3), Lukowski SL(4), Schenker VJ(4), 
Willcutt EG(5), Thompson LA(6), Petrill SA(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Gerontology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 
USA.
(2)Bill Wilkerson Center and Department of Otolaryngology, Vanderbilt 
University, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
University, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, USA.
(5)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of Colorado at Boulder, 
USA.
(6)Department of Psychological Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, USA.

Socioeconomic risks (SES risks) are robust risk factors influencing children's 
academic development. However, it is unclear whether the effects of SES on 
academic development operate universally in all children equally or whether they 
vary differentially in children with particular characteristics. The current 
study aimed to explore children's temperament as protective or risk factors that 
potentially moderate the associations between SES risks and academic 
development. Specifically, latent growth modeling (LGM) was used in two 
longitudinal datasets with a total of 2236 children to examine how family SES 
risks and children's temperament interactively predicted the development of 
reading and math from middle childhood to early adolescence. Results showed that 
low negative affect, high effortful control, and low surgency mitigated the 
negative associations between SES risks and both reading and math development in 
this developmental period. These findings underline the heterogeneous nature of 
the negative associations between SES risks and academic development and 
highlight the importance of the interplay between biological and social factors 
on individual differences in development.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12380
PMCID: PMC4916056
PMID: 26689998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


525. Dev Sci. 2017 May;20(3):10.1111/desc.12371. doi: 10.1111/desc.12371. Epub 2015 
Nov 27.

Genetic associations with reflexive visual attention in infancy and childhood.

Lundwall RA(1), Dannemiller JL(2), Goldsmith HH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Brigham Young University, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Rice University, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA.

This study elucidates genetic influences on reflexive (as opposed to sustained) 
attention in children (aged 9-16 years; N = 332) who previously participated as 
infants in visual attention studies using orienting to a moving bar 
(Dannemiller, 2004). We investigated genetic associations with reflexive 
attention measures in infancy and childhood in the same group of children. The 
genetic markers (single nucleotide polymorphisms and variable number tandem 
repeats on the genes APOE, BDNF, CHRNA4, COMT, DRD4, HTR4, IGF2, MAOA, SLC5A7, 
SLC6A3, and SNAP25) are related to brain development and/or to the availability 
of neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine, dopamine, or serotonin. This study 
shows that typically developing children have differences in reflexive attention 
associated with their genes, as we found in adults (Lundwall, Guo & Dannemiller, 
2012). This effort to extend our previous findings to outcomes in infancy and 
childhood was necessary because genetic influence may differ over the course of 
development. Although two of the genes that were tested in our adult study 
(Lundwall et al., 2012) were significant in either our infant study (SLC6A3) or 
child study (DRD4), the specific markers tested differed. Performance on the 
infant task was associated with SLC6A3. In addition, several genetic 
associations with an analogous child task occurred with markers on CHRNA4, COMT, 
and DRD4. Interestingly, the child version of the task involved an interaction 
such that which genotype group performed poorer on the child task depended on 
whether we were examining the higher or lower infant scoring group. These 
findings are discussed in terms of genetic influences on reflexive attention in 
infancy and childhood.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12371
PMCID: PMC4884175
PMID: 26613685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


526. Dev Sci. 2017 Mar;20(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12357. Epub 2015 Nov 8.

The origins of word learning: Brain responses of 3-month-olds indicate their 
rapid association of objects and words.

Friedrich M(1)(2), Friederici AD(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychology, Humboldt-University Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Neuropsychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and 
Brain Sciences, Germany.

The present study explored the origins of word learning in early infancy. Using 
event-related potentials (ERP) we monitored the brain activity of 3-month-old 
infants when they were repeatedly exposed to several initially novel words 
paired consistently with each the same initially novel objects or inconsistently 
with different objects. Our results provide strong evidence that these young 
infants extract statistic regularities in the distribution of the co-occurrences 
of objects and words extremely quickly. The data suggest that this ability is 
based on the rapid formation of associations between the neural representations 
of objects and words, but that the new associations are not retained in 
long-term memory until the next day. The type of brain response moreover 
indicates that, unlike in older infants, in 3-month-olds a semantic processing 
stage is not involved. Their ability to combine words with meaningful 
information is caused by a primary learning mechanism that enables the formation 
of proto-words and acts as a precursor for the acquisition of genuine words.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12357
PMID: 26548459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


527. Dev Sci. 2016 Sep;19(5):757-69. doi: 10.1111/desc.12333. Epub 2015 Sep 22.

Functional brain organization for number processing in pre-verbal infants.

Edwards LA(1)(2), Wagner JB(3), Simon CE(4), Hyde DC(4).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Education, Harvard University, USA.
(2)Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, College of Staten Island, City University of New 
York, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA.

Humans are born with the ability to mentally represent the approximate 
numerosity of a set of objects, but little is known about the brain systems that 
sub-serve this ability early in life and their relation to the brain systems 
underlying symbolic number and mathematics later in development. Here we 
investigate processing of numerical magnitudes before the acquisition of a 
symbolic numerical system or even spoken language, by measuring the brain 
response to numerosity changes in pre-verbal infants using functional 
near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS). To do this, we presented infants with two 
types of numerical stimulus blocks: number change blocks that presented dot 
arrays alternating in numerosity and no change blocks that presented dot arrays 
all with the same number. Images were carefully constructed to rule out the 
possibility that responses to number changes could be due to non-numerical 
stimulus properties that tend to co-vary with number. Interleaved with the two 
types of numerical blocks were audio-visual animations designed to increase 
attention. We observed that number change blocks evoked an increase in 
oxygenated hemoglobin over a focal right parietal region that was greater than 
that observed during no change blocks and during audio-visual attention blocks. 
The location of this effect was consistent with intra-parietal activity seen in 
older children and adults for both symbolic and non-symbolic numerical tasks. A 
distinct set of bilateral occipital and middle parietal channels responded more 
to the attention-grabbing animations than to either of the types of numerical 
stimuli, further dissociating the specific right parietal response to number 
from a more general bilateral visual or attentional response. These results 
provide the strongest evidence to date that the right parietal cortex is 
specialized for numerical processing in infancy, as the response to number is 
dissociated from visual change processing and general attentional processing.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12333
PMID: 26395560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


528. Dev Sci. 2016 May;19(3):382-93. doi: 10.1111/desc.12319. Epub 2015 Aug 17.

Bimodal emotion congruency is critical to preverbal infants' abstract rule 
learning.

Tsui AS(1)(2), Ma YK(1), Ho A(1), Chow HM(1)(3), Tseng CH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The University of Hong Kong, China.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Ottawa, Canada.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts Boston, USA.

Extracting general rules from specific examples is important, as we must face 
the same challenge displayed in various formats. Previous studies have found 
that bimodal presentation of grammar-like rules (e.g. ABA) enhanced 
5-month-olds' capacity to acquire a rule that infants failed to learn when the 
rule was presented with visual presentation of the shapes alone 
(circle-triangle-circle) or auditory presentation of the syllables (la-ba-la) 
alone. However, the mechanisms and constraints for this bimodal learning 
facilitation are still unknown. In this study, we used audio-visual relation 
congruency between bimodal stimulation to disentangle possible facilitation 
sources. We exposed 8- to 10-month-old infants to an AAB sequence consisting of 
visual faces with affective expressions and/or auditory voices conveying 
emotions. Our results showed that infants were able to distinguish the learned 
AAB rule from other novel rules under bimodal stimulation when the affects in 
audio and visual stimuli were congruently paired (Experiments 1A and 2A). 
Infants failed to acquire the same rule when audio-visual stimuli were 
incongruently matched (Experiment 2B) and when only the visual (Experiment 1B) 
or the audio (Experiment 1C) stimuli were presented. Our results highlight that 
bimodal facilitation in infant rule learning is not only dependent on better 
statistical probability and redundant sensory information, but also the 
relational congruency of audio-visual information. A video abstract of this 
article can be viewed at https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=KYTyjH1k9RQ.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12319
PMID: 26280911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


529. Dev Sci. 2016 Sep;19(5):723-40. doi: 10.1111/desc.12329. Epub 2015 Jul 30.

Relationships between event-related potentials and behavioral and scholastic 
measures of reading ability: A large-scale, cross-sectional study.

Khalifian N(1), Stites MC(1), Laszlo S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Binghamton University, USA.
(2)Program in Linguistics, Binghamton University, USA.

In the cognitive, computational, neuropsychological, and educational 
literatures, it is established that children approach text in unique ways, and 
that even adult readers can differ in the strategies they bring to reading. In 
the developmental event-related potential (ERP) literature, however, children 
with differing degrees of reading ability are, the majority of the time, placed 
in monolithic groups such as 'normal' and 'dyslexic' (e.g. Araújo et al., 2012) 
and analyzed only at the group level. This is likely done due to methodological 
concerns - such as low sample size or a lack of statistical power - that can 
make it difficult to perform analysis at the individual level. Here, we 
collected ERPs and behavior from > 100 children in grades pre-K-7, as they read 
unconnected text silently to themselves. This large sample, combined with the 
statistical power of the Linear Mixed Effects Regression (LMER) technique, 
enables us to address individual differences in ERP component effects due to 
reading ability at an unprecedented level of detail. Results indicate that it is 
possible to predict reading-related report card scores from ERP component 
amplitudes - especially that of the N250, a component pertaining to sublexical 
processing (including phonological decoding). Results also reveal relationships 
between behavioral measures of reading ability and ERP component effects that 
have previously been elusive, such as the relationship between vocabulary and 
N400 mean amplitude (cf. Henderson et al., 2011). We conclude that it is 
possible to meaningfully examine reading-related ERP effects at the single 
subject level in developing readers, and that this type of analysis can provide 
novel insights into both behavior and scholastic achievement.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12329
PMID: 26227511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


530. Dev Sci. 2016 Sep;19(5):817-33. doi: 10.1111/desc.12324. Epub 2015 Jul 30.

Probing the nature of deficits in the 'Approximate Number System' in children 
with persistent Developmental Dyscalculia.

Bugden S(1), Ansari D(1).

Author information:
(1)Numerical Cognition Laboratory, Department of Psychology, The Brain and Mind 
Institute, The University of Western Ontario, Canada.

In the present study we examined whether children with Developmental Dyscalculia 
(DD) exhibit a deficit in the so-called 'Approximate Number System' (ANS). To do 
so, we examined a group of elementary school children who demonstrated 
persistent low math achievement over 4 years and compared them to typically 
developing (TD), aged-matched controls. The integrity of the ANS was measured 
using the Panamath (www.panamath.org) non-symbolic numerical discrimination 
test. Children with DD demonstrated imprecise ANS acuity indexed by larger Weber 
fraction (w) compared to TD controls. Given recent findings showing that 
non-symbolic numerical discrimination is affected by visual parameters, we went 
further and investigated whether children performed differently on trials on 
which number of dots and their overall area were either congruent or incongruent 
with each other. This analysis revealed that differences in w were only found 
between DD and TD children on the incongruent trials. In addition, visuo-spatial 
working memory strongly predicts individual differences in ANS acuity (w) during 
the incongruent trials. Thus the purported ANS deficit in DD can be explained by 
a difficulty in extracting number from an array of dots when area is 
anti-correlated with number. These data highlight the role of visuo-spatial 
working memory during the extraction process, and demonstrate that close 
attention needs to be paid to perceptual processes invoked by tasks thought to 
represent measures of the ANS.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12324
PMID: 26227387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


531. Dev Sci. 2016 Sep;19(5):699-709. doi: 10.1111/desc.12317. Epub 2015 Jun 12.

Electrophysiological correlates of observational learning in children.

Rodriguez Buritica JM(1)(2)(3), Eppinger B(4), Schuck NW(1)(5), Heekeren 
HR(2)(3), Li SC(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Center of Lifespan Psychology, Max-Planck-Institute for Human Development, 
Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Education Sciences and Psychology, Freie Universität Berlin, 
Germany.
(3)Berlin School of Mind and Brain, Germany.
(4)Department of Psychology, TU Dresden, Germany.
(5)Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, USA.

Observational learning is an important mechanism for cognitive and social 
development. However, the neurophysiological mechanisms underlying observational 
learning in children are not well understood. In this study, we used a 
probabilistic reward-based observational learning paradigm to compare behavioral 
and electrophysiological markers of individual and observational reinforcement 
learning in 8- to 10-year-old children. Specifically, we manipulated the amount 
of observable information as well as children's similarity in age to the 
observed person (same-aged child vs. adult) to examine the effects of similarity 
in age on the integration of observed information in children. We show that the 
feedback-related negativity (FRN) during individual reinforcement learning 
reflects the valence of outcomes of own actions. Furthermore, we found that the 
feedback-related negativity during observational reinforcement learning (oFRN) 
showed a similar distinction between outcome valences of observed actions. This 
suggests that the oFRN can serve as a measure of observational learning in 
middle childhood. Moreover, during observational learning children profited from 
the additional social information and imitated the choices of their own peers 
more than those of adults, indicating that children have a tendency to conform 
more with similar others (e.g. their own peers) compared to dissimilar others 
(adults). Taken together, our results show that children can benefit from 
integrating observable information and that oFRN may serve as a measure of 
observational learning in children.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12317
PMID: 26074422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


532. Dev Sci. 2016 May;19(3):372-81. doi: 10.1111/desc.12318. Epub 2015 Jun 12.

Child-directed teaching and social learning at 18 months of age: evidence from 
Yucatec Mayan and US infants.

Shneidman L(1), Gaskins S(2), Woodward A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Northeastern Illinois University, USA.

In several previous studies, 18-month-old infants who were directly addressed 
demonstrated more robust imitative behaviors than infants who simply observed 
another's actions, leading theorists to suggest that child-directed interactions 
carried unique informational value. However, these data came exclusively from 
cultural communities where direct teaching is commonplace, raising the 
possibility that the findings reflect regularities in infants' social 
experiences rather than responses to innate or a priori learning mechanisms. The 
current studies consider infants' imitative learning from child-directed 
teaching and observed interaction in two cultural communities, a Yucatec Mayan 
village where infants have been described as experiencing relatively limited 
direct instruction (Study 1) and a US city where infants are regularly directly 
engaged (Study 2). Eighteen-month-old infants from each community participated 
in a within-subjects study design where they were directly taught to use novel 
objects on one day and observed actors using different objects on another day. 
Mayan infants showed relative increases in imitative behaviors on their second 
visit to the lab as compared to their first visit, but there was no effect of 
condition. US infants showed no difference in imitative behavior in the 
child-directed vs. observed conditions; however, infants who were directly 
addressed on their first visit showed significantly higher overall imitation 
rates than infants who observed on their first visit. Together, these findings 
call into question the idea that child-directed teaching holds automatic or 
universal informational value.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12318
PMID: 26072667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


533. Dev Sci. 2016 May;19(3):419-26. doi: 10.1111/desc.12314. Epub 2015 May 21.

What would Batman do? Self-distancing improves executive function in young 
children.

White RE(1)(2), Carlson SM(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Child Development, University of Minnesota - Twin Cities, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania.

This experimental research assessed the influence of graded levels of 
self-distancing - psychological distancing from one's egocentric perspective - 
on executive function (EF) in young children. Three- (n = 48) and 5-year-old 
(n = 48) children were randomly assigned to one of four manipulations of 
distance from the self (from proximal to distal: self-immersed, control, third 
person, and exemplar) on a comprehensive measure of EF. Performance increased as 
a function of self-distancing across age groups. Follow-up analyses indicated 
that 5-year-olds were driving this effect. They showed significant improvements 
in EF with increased distance from the self, outperforming controls both when 
taking a third person perspective on the self and when taking the perspective of 
an exemplar other (e.g., Batman) through role play. Three-year-olds, however, 
did not show increased EF performance as a function of greater distance from the 
self. Preliminary results suggest that developments in theory of mind might 
contribute to these age-related differences in efficacy. These findings speak to 
the importance of psychological distancing in the expression of conscious 
control over thought and action from a young age and suggest a promising new 
avenue for early EF intervention.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12314
PMID: 25997842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


534. Dev Sci. 2016 May;19(3):440-51. doi: 10.1111/desc.12311. Epub 2015 May 10.

Impaired face detection may explain some but not all cases of developmental 
prosopagnosia.

Dalrymple KA(1), Duchaine B(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Child Development, University of Minnesota, USA.
(2)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Dartmouth College, USA.

Developmental prosopagnosia (DP) is defined by severe face recognition 
difficulties due to the failure to develop the visual mechanisms for processing 
faces. The two-process theory of face recognition (Morton & Johnson, 1991) 
implies that DP could result from a failure of an innate face detection system; 
this failure could prevent an individual from then tuning higher-level processes 
for face recognition (Johnson, 2005). Work with adults indicates that some 
individuals with DP have normal face detection whereas others are impaired. 
However, face detection has not been addressed in children with DP, even though 
their results may be especially informative because they have had less 
opportunity to develop strategies that could mask detection deficits. We tested 
the face detection abilities of seven children with DP. Four were impaired at 
face detection to some degree (i.e. abnormally slow, or failed to find faces) 
while the remaining three children had normal face detection. Hence, the cases 
with impaired detection are consistent with the two-process account suggesting 
that DP could result from a failure of face detection. However, the cases with 
normal detection implicate a higher-level origin. The dissociation between 
normal face detection and impaired identity perception also indicates that these 
abilities depend on different neurocognitive processes.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12311
PMID: 25959299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


535. Dev Sci. 2016 Jan;19(1):126-44. doi: 10.1111/desc.12296. Epub 2015 May 1.

How to rapidly construct a spatial-numerical representation in preliterate 
children (at least temporarily).

Patro K(1)(2), Fischer U(1), Nuerk HC(1)(3)(4), Cress U(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Knowledge Media Research Center, Tuebingen, Germany.
(2)Faculty of Psychology, University of Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Institute of Psychology, Eberhard Karls University of Tuebingen, Germany.
(4)LEAD Graduate School, Eberhard Karls University of Tuebingen, Germany.

Spatial processing of numbers has emerged as one of the basic properties of 
humans' mathematical thinking. However, how and when number-space relations 
develop is a highly contested issue. One dominant view has been that a link 
between numbers and left/right spatial directions is constructed based on 
directional experience associated with reading and writing. However, some early 
forms of a number-space link have been observed in preschool children who cannot 
yet read and write. As literacy experience is evidently not necessary for 
number-space effects, we are searching for other potential sources of this 
association. Here we propose and test a hypothesis that the number-space link 
can be quickly constructed in preschool children's cognition on the basis of 
spatially oriented visuo-motor activities. We trained 3- and 4-year-old children 
with a non-numerical spatial movement task (left-to-right or right-to-left), 
where via touch screen children had to move a frog across a pond. After the 
training, children had to perform a numerosity comparison task. After 
left-to-right training, we observed a SNARC-like effect (reactions to smaller 
numbers were faster on the left side, and reactions to larger numbers on the 
right side), and after right-to-left training a reverse effect. These results 
are the first to show a causal link between visuo-motor activities and 
number-space associations in children before they learn to read and write. We 
argue that simple activities, such as manual games, dominant in a given society, 
might shape number-space associations in children in a way similar to lifelong 
reading training.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12296
PMID: 25939433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


536. Dev Sci. 2016 Mar;19(2):235-50. doi: 10.1111/desc.12300. Epub 2015 Apr 14.

Preschoolers use phrasal prosody online to constrain syntactic analysis.

de Carvalho A(1)(2), Dautriche I(1)(2), Christophe A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et Psycholinguistique (ENS, EHESS, CNRS), 
Département d'Études Cognitives (École Normale Supérieure - PSL Research 
University), Paris, France.
(2)Maternité Port-Royal, AP-HP, Faculté de Médecine Paris Descartes, France.

Two experiments were conducted to investigate whether young children are able to 
take into account phrasal prosody when computing the syntactic structure of a 
sentence. Pairs of French noun/verb homophones were selected to create locally 
ambiguous sentences ([la petite ferme] [est très jolie] 'the small farm is very 
nice' vs. [la petite] [ferme la fenêtre] 'the little girl closes the 
window'--brackets indicate prosodic boundaries). Although these sentences start 
with the same three words, ferme is a noun (farm) in the former but a verb (to 
close) in the latter case. The only difference between these sentence beginnings 
is the prosodic structure, that reflects the syntactic structure (with a 
prosodic boundary just before the critical word when it is a verb, and just 
after it when it is a noun). Crucially, all words following the homophone were 
masked, such that prosodic cues were the only disambiguating information. 
Children successfully exploited prosodic information to assign the appropriate 
syntactic category to the target word, in both an oral completion task 
(4.5-year-olds, Experiment 1) and in a preferential looking paradigm with an 
eye-tracker (3.5-year-olds and 4.5-year-olds, Experiment 2). These results show 
that both groups of children exploit the position of a word within the prosodic 
structure when computing its syntactic category. In other words, even younger 
children of 3.5 years old exploit phrasal prosody online to constrain their 
syntactic analysis. This ability to exploit phrasal prosody to compute syntactic 
structure may help children parse sentences containing unknown words, and 
facilitate the acquisition of word meanings.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12300
PMID: 25872796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


537. Dev Sci. 2016 Mar;19(2):179-94. doi: 10.1111/desc.12302. Epub 2015 Apr 6.

Cumulative risk disparities in children's neurocognitive functioning: a 
developmental cascade model.

Wade M(1), Browne DT(1), Plamondon A(1), Daniel E(1), Jenkins JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Psychology and Human Development, University of 
Toronto, Canada.

The current longitudinal study examined the role of cumulative social risk on 
children's theory of mind (ToM) and executive functioning (EF) across early 
development. Further, we also tested a cascade model of development in which 
children's social cognition at 18 months was hypothesized to predict ToM and EF 
at age 4.5 through intermediary language skills at age 3. We then examined 
whether this developmental mechanism varied as a function of social risk status. 
Participants were 501 children recruited when they were newborns, at which point 
eight psychosocial risk factors were assessed and combined into a metric of 
cumulative social disadvantage. Families were followed up at 18 months, at which 
point four social-cognitive skills were assessed using developmentally sensitive 
tasks: joint attention, empathy, cooperation, and self-recognition. Language was 
measured at age 3 using a standardized measure of receptive vocabulary. At age 3 
and 4.5, EF and ToM were measured using previously validated tasks. Results 
showed that there were notable cumulative risk disparities in overall 
neurocognitive skill development, and these effects became more differentiated 
over time. Support was also found for a developmental mechanism wherein the 
effect of social cognition at 18 months on ToM and EF in the preschool period 
operated specifically through children's receptive language ability at age 3. 
This pathway functioned similarly for children with both low- and high-risk 
backgrounds. These results extend previous findings by documenting the role of 
cumulative social disadvantage on children's neurocognition and the pathways 
that link key neurocognitive abilities across early development.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12302
PMID: 25845409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


538. Dev Sci. 2016 Jan;19(1):109-25. doi: 10.1111/desc.12294. Epub 2015 Mar 5.

Do attitudes toward societal structure predict beliefs about free will and 
achievement? Evidence from the Indian caste system.

Srinivasan M(1), Dunham Y(2), Hicks CM(3), Barner D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Yale University, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego, USA.

Intuitive theories about the malleability of intellectual ability affect our 
motivation and achievement in life. But how are such theories shaped by the 
culture in which an individual is raised? We addressed this question by 
exploring how Indian children's and adults' attitudes toward the Hindu caste 
system--and its deterministic worldview--are related to differences in their 
intuitive theories. Strikingly, we found that, beginning at least in middle 
school and continuing into adulthood, individuals who placed more importance on 
caste were more likely to adopt deterministic intuitive theories. We also found 
a developmental change in the scope of this relationship, such that in children, 
caste attitudes were linked only to abstract beliefs about personal freedom, but 
that by adulthood, caste attitudes were also linked to beliefs about the 
potential achievement of members of different castes, personal intellectual 
ability, and personality attributes. These results are the first to directly 
relate the societal structure in which a person is raised to the specific 
intuitive theories they adopt.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12294
PMID: 25754516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


539. Dev Sci. 2015 Nov;18(6):926-39. doi: 10.1111/desc.12281. Epub 2015 Feb 20.

Mapping the development of facial expression recognition.

Rodger H(1), Vizioli L(1), Ouyang X(1), Caldara R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Fribourg, Switzerland.

Reading the non-verbal cues from faces to infer the emotional states of others 
is central to our daily social interactions from very early in life. Despite the 
relatively well-documented ontogeny of facial expression recognition in infancy, 
our understanding of the development of this critical social skill throughout 
childhood into adulthood remains limited. To this end, using a psychophysical 
approach we implemented the QUEST threshold-seeking algorithm to parametrically 
manipulate the quantity of signals available in faces normalized for contrast 
and luminance displaying the six emotional expressions, plus neutral. We thus 
determined observers' perceptual thresholds for effective discrimination of each 
emotional expression from 5 years of age up to adulthood. Consistent with 
previous studies, happiness was most easily recognized with minimum signals (35% 
on average), whereas fear required the maximum signals (97% on average) across 
groups. Overall, recognition improved with age for all expressions except 
happiness and fear, for which all age groups including the youngest remained 
within the adult range. Uniquely, our findings characterize the recognition 
trajectories of the six basic emotions into three distinct groupings: 
expressions that show a steep improvement with age - disgust, neutral, and 
anger; expressions that show a more gradual improvement with age - sadness, 
surprise; and those that remain stable from early childhood - happiness and 
fear, indicating that the coding for these expressions is already mature by 5 
years of age. Altogether, our data provide for the first time a fine-grained 
mapping of the development of facial expression recognition. This approach 
significantly increases our understanding of the decoding of emotions across 
development and offers a novel tool to measure impairments for specific facial 
expressions in developmental clinical populations.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12281
PMID: 25704672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


540. Dev Sci. 2016 Jan;19(1):90-108. doi: 10.1111/desc.12291. Epub 2015 Feb 20.

The sexual dimorphic association of cardiorespiratory fitness to working memory 
in children.

Drollette ES(1), Scudder MR(1), Raine LB(1), Davis Moore R(1), Pontifex MB(2), 
Erickson KI(3)(4), Hillman CH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Kinesiology and Community Health, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, USA.
(2)Department of Kinesiology, Michigan State University, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, USA.
(4)The Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, University of Pittsburgh, USA.

The present investigation examined the sexual dimorphic patterns of 
cardiorespiratory fitness to working memory in preadolescent children (age 
range: 7.7-10.9). Data were collected in three separate studies (Study 1: n = 
97, 42 females; Study 2: n = 95, 45 females; Study 3: n = 84, 37 females). All 
participants completed a cardiorespiratory fitness assessment in addition to a 
specific measure of working memory (i.e. the operation span task, the n-back 
task, or the Sternberg task). Results from all three samples revealed that 
higher cardiorespiratory fitness levels were associated with better working 
memory performance only for males with no such relation observed for females. In 
addition, the sexually dimorphic pattern was selective for the most challenging 
working memory conditions in each task. Together, these findings reveal new 
evidence that cardiorespiratory fitness is selectively related to better working 
memory performance for male children. This investigation provides additional 
insight into how interventions aimed at improving fitness may influence 
cognitive development differentially among preadolescent children.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12291
PMID: 25702796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


541. Dev Sci. 2015 Jan;18(1):1-23. doi: 10.1111/desc.12282.

Development and the epigenome: the 'synapse' of gene-environment interplay.

Boyce WT(1), Kobor MS.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Psychiatry, University of California, San 
Francisco, USA; Child and Brain Development Program, Canadian Institute for 
Advanced Research, Canada.

This paper argues that there is a revolution afoot in the developmental science 
of gene-environment interplay. We summarize, for an audience of developmental 
researchers and clinicians, how epigenetic processes - chromatin structural 
modifications that regulate gene expression without changing DNA sequences - may 
offer a strong, parsimonious account for the convergence of genetic and 
contextual variation in the genesis of adaptive and maladaptive development. 
Epigenetic processes may play a plausible explanatory role in understanding: 
divergent trajectories and sexual dimorphisms in brain development; statistical 
interactions between genes and environments; the biological embedding of early 
psychosocial adversities; the linkages of such adversities to disorders of 
mental health; the striking individual variation in the strength of those 
linkages; the molecular origins of critical and sensitive periods; and the 
transgenerational inheritance of risk and protection. Taken together, these 
arguments converge in a claim that epigenetic processes constitute a promising 
and illuminating point of connection - a 'synapse' - between genes and 
environments.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12282
PMID: 25546559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


542. Dev Sci. 2015 Nov;18(6):972-8. doi: 10.1111/desc.12277. Epub 2014 Dec 20.

Inexperienced newborn chicks use geometry to spontaneously reorient to an 
artificial social partner.

Chiandetti C(1), Spelke ES(2), Vallortigara G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Psychology Unit, University of Trieste, Italy.
(2)Department of Psychology, Harvard University, USA.
(3)Center for Mind-Brain Sciences, University of Trento, Italy.

A fundamental process underlying navigation behaviour, shown to occur in every 
species tested, uses geometric properties of the environment for location memory 
and orientation. Here we employ a new method to ask whether this basic geometric 
orientation ability is innately predisposed in the brain or depends on specific 
experiences navigating in a geometrically rich environment. Using the newborn 
domestic chick as a model system, we present a working memory task testing 
reorientation towards a filial imprinting object under rigorous controlled 
rearing conditions. In the absence of any previous exposure to a geometrically 
rich environment, newly hatched chicks spontaneously recovered their bearings by 
making use of distances and directional relations to reorient themselves to an 
artificial social partner. These findings provide evidence for an innate 
capacity to navigate by the geometric structure of the environment.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12277
PMID: 25530027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


543. Dev Sci. 2015 Nov;18(6):979-93. doi: 10.1111/desc.12272. Epub 2014 Dec 20.

Uniquely human self-control begins at school age.

Herrmann E(1), Misch A(1), Hernandez-Lloreda V(2), Tomasello M(1).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Department of Methodology for Behavioral Science, Universidad Complutense de 
Madrid, Spain.

Human beings have remarkable skills of self-control, but the evolutionary 
origins of these skills are unknown. Here we compare children at 3 and 6 years 
of age with one of humans' two nearest relatives, chimpanzees, on a battery of 
reactivity and self-control tasks. Three-year-old children and chimpanzees were 
very similar in their abilities to resist an impulse for immediate 
gratification, repeat a previously successful action, attend to a distracting 
noise, and quit in the face of repeated failure. Six-year-old children were more 
skillful than either 3-year-olds or chimpanzees at controlling their impulses. 
These results suggest that humans' most fundamental skills of self-control - as 
part of the overall decision-making process - are a part of their general great 
ape heritage, and that their species-unique skills of self-control begin at 
around the age at which many children begin formal schooling.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12272
PMID: 25529764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


544. Dev Sci. 2015 Nov;18(6):1036-43. doi: 10.1111/desc.12269. Epub 2014 Dec 7.

Young children's automatic encoding of social categories.

Weisman K(1), Johnson MV(1), Shutts K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA.

The present research investigated young children's automatic encoding of two 
social categories that are highly relevant to adults: gender and race. Three- to 
6-year-old participants learned facts about unfamiliar target children who 
varied in either gender or race and were asked to remember which facts went with 
which targets. When participants made mistakes, they were more likely to confuse 
targets of the same gender than targets of different genders, but they were 
equally likely to confuse targets within and across racial groups. However, a 
social preference measure indicated that participants were sensitive to both 
gender and race information. Participants with more racial diversity in their 
social environments were more likely to encode race, but did not have stronger 
racial preferences. These findings provide evidence that young children do not 
automatically encode all perceptible features of others. Further, gender may be 
a more fundamental social category than race.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12269
PMCID: PMC4476957
PMID: 25483012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


545. Dev Sci. 2015 Jul;18(4):622-34. doi: 10.1111/desc.12238. Epub 2014 Nov 28.

A model to investigate the mechanisms underlying the emergence and development 
of independent sitting.

O'Brien KM(1), Zhang J(2), Walley PR(2), Rhoads JF(2), Haddad JM(1)(3), Claxton 
LJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health and Kinesiology, Purdue University, USA.
(2)School of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue University, USA.
(3)Center for Aging and the Life-Course, Purdue University, USA.

When infants first begin to sit independently, they are highly unstable and 
unable to maintain upright sitting posture for more than a few seconds. Over the 
course of 3 months, the sitting ability of infants drastically improves. To 
investigate the mechanisms controlling the development of sitting posture, a 
single-degree-of-freedom inverted pendulum model was developed. Passive muscle 
properties were modeled with a stiffness and damping term, while active 
neurological control was modeled with a time-delayed 
proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controller. The findings of the 
simulations suggest that infants primarily utilize passive muscle stiffness to 
remain upright when they first begin to sit. This passive control mechanism 
allows the infant to remain upright so that active feedback control mechanisms 
can develop. The emergence of active control mechanisms allows infants to 
integrate sensory information into their movements so that they can exhibit more 
adaptive sitting.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12238
PMID: 25442426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


546. Dev Sci. 2015 Sep;18(5):853-62. doi: 10.1111/desc.12264. Epub 2014 Nov 29.

Spatial estimation: a non-Bayesian alternative.

Barth H(1), Lesser E(1), Taggart J(1), Slusser E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Wesleyan University, USA.
(2)Department of Child and Adolescent Development, San Jose State University, 
USA.

A large collection of estimation phenomena (e.g. biases arising when adults or 
children estimate remembered locations of objects in bounded spaces; 
Huttenlocher, Newcombe & Sandberg, 1994) are commonly explained in terms of 
complex Bayesian models. We provide evidence that some of these phenomena may be 
modeled instead by a simpler non-Bayesian alternative. Undergraduates and 9- to 
10-year-olds completed a speeded linear position estimation task. Bias in both 
groups' estimates could be explained in terms of a simple psychophysical model 
of proportion estimation. Moreover, some individual data were not compatible 
with the requirements of the more complex Bayesian model.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12264
PMID: 25440776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


547. Dev Sci. 2015 Sep;18(5):713-22. doi: 10.1111/desc.12261. Epub 2014 Nov 28.

The effects of early foster care intervention on attention biases in previously 
institutionalized children in Romania.

Troller-Renfree S(1), McDermott JM(2), Nelson CA(3)(4)(5)(6), Zeanah CH(7), Fox 
NA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology, University of 
Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, USA.
(3)Harvard Medical School, USA.
(4)Boston Children's Hospital, USA.
(5)Harvard Center on the Developing Child, USA.
(6)Harvard Graduate School of Education, USA.
(7)Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, USA.

Children raised in institutions experience psychosocial deprivation that can 
negatively impact attention skills and emotion regulation, which subsequently 
may influence behavioral regulation and social relationships. The current study 
examined visual attention biases in 8-year-old children who were part of the 
Bucharest Early Intervention Project (BEIP). Relations among attention biases 
and concurrent social outcomes were also investigated. In early childhood, 136 
children abandoned at birth or shortly thereafter into institutional care were 
randomized to receive a high-quality foster care intervention or care-as-usual 
within the context of the Bucharest Early Intervention Project (BEIP). At 8 
years of age, 50 care-as-usual, 55 foster care, and 52 community controls 
performed a behavioral dot-probe task, and indices of attention biases to threat 
and positive stimuli were calculated. Concurrent data on social behavior were 
collected. Children placed into the foster care intervention had a significant 
attention bias toward positive stimuli, while children who received 
care-as-usual had a significant bias toward threat. Children in the foster care 
intervention had a significantly larger positive bias when compared to the 
care-as-usual group. A positive bias was related to more social engagement, more 
prosocial behavior, less externalizing disorders, and less emotionally withdrawn 
behavior. The magnitude of positive bias was predicted by age of placement into 
foster care among children with a history of institutionalization. An attention 
bias towards positive stimuli was associated with reduced risk for behavioral 
problems amongst children who experienced early psychosocial deprivation. 
Research assessing attention biases in children experiencing early environmental 
stress may refine our understanding of the mechanisms underlying risk for later 
psychiatric and social disorders and inform prevention efforts.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12261
PMCID: PMC4447605
PMID: 25439678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


548. Dev Sci. 2015 Jul;18(4):525-42. doi: 10.1111/desc.12232. Epub 2014 Oct 7.

Relation of perinatal risk and early parenting to executive control at the 
transition to school.

Clark CA(1), Woodward LJ(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Prevention Science Institute, University of 
Oregon, USA.
(2)Departments of Pediatric Newborn Medicine, Brigham & Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New 
Zealand.

Executive control (EC) develops rapidly during the preschool years and is 
central to academic achievement and functional outcome. Although children with 
perinatal adversity are at known risk for EC impairments, little is known about 
the underlying nature of these impairments or the mechanisms that contribute to 
their development over time. Drawing on a cohort of 110 high-risk children born 
very preterm (VPT; < 33 weeks / < 1500 g) and 113 healthy full-term children, 
this study examined the implications of perinatal adversity and early parenting 
for children's EC as they transitioned to formal schooling. Parent supportive 
presence, intrusiveness, and parent-child synchrony were observed during a 
series of problem-solving tasks at ages 2 and 4 years. At age 6, children 
completed a comprehensive battery of EC tasks. Academic outcomes were assessed 
at age 9. The VPT group showed global EC impairments at age 6, although the 
unitary factor that best characterized the structure of EC was the same in both 
groups. High-risk dyads were characterized by more intrusive and less 
synchronous parent-child interactions in early childhood, which in turn 
predicted poorer child EC at age 6. EC partially mediated the relation of risk 
status to poorer academic achievement at age 9. Findings demonstrate the 
cumulative effects of perinatal adversity on children's EC in the crucial 
transition to schooling. They also highlight the importance of the parent-child 
relationship as a target for intervention efforts to help mitigate these 
effects.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12232
PMID: 25288501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


549. Dev Sci. 2015 Jul;18(4):645-54. doi: 10.1111/desc.12233. Epub 2014 Oct 5.

Pedagogical cues encourage toddlers' transmission of recently demonstrated 
functions to unfamiliar adults.

Vredenburgh C(1), Kushnir T(1), Casasola M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Development, Cornell University, USA.

Young children use pedagogical cues as a signal that others' actions are social 
or cultural conventions. Here we show that children selectively transmit (enact 
in a new social situation) causal functions demonstrated pedagogically, even 
when they have learned and can produce alternative functions as well. 
Two-year-olds saw two novel toys, each with two functions. One experimenter 
demonstrated one function using pedagogical cues (eye contact and child-directed 
speech) and a second experimenter demonstrated the alternative function using 
intentional actions towards the object, but without pedagogical cues. Children 
imitated both functions at equal rates initially, indicating equal causal 
learning from both types of demonstration. However, they were significantly more 
likely to enact the pedagogical function for a new adult not present during the 
initial demonstrations. These results indicate that pedagogical cues influence 
children's transmission of information, perhaps playing a role in the 
dissemination of cultural conventions from a young age.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12233
PMID: 25284008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


550. Dev Sci. 2015 May;18(3):404-19. doi: 10.1111/desc.12225. Epub 2014 Oct 5.

Preschoolers with Down syndrome do not yet show the learning and memory 
impairments seen in adults with Down syndrome.

Roberts LV(1), Richmond JL.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.

Individuals with Down syndrome (DS) exhibit a behavioral phenotype of specific 
strengths and weaknesses, in addition to a generalized cognitive delay. In 
particular, adults with DS exhibit specific deficits in learning and memory 
processes that depend on the hippocampus, and there is some suggestion of 
impairments on executive function tasks that depend on the prefrontal cortex. 
While these functions have been investigated in adults with DS, it is largely 
unclear how these processes develop in young children with DS. Here we tested 
preschoolers with DS and typically developing children, age-matched on either 
receptive language or non-verbal scores as a proxy for mental age (MA), on a 
battery of eye-tracking and behavioral measures that have been shown to depend 
on the hippocampus or the prefrontal cortex. Preschoolers with DS performed 
equivalently to MA-matched controls, suggesting that the disability-specific 
memory deficits documented in adults with DS, in addition to a cognitive delay, 
are not yet evident in preschoolers with DS, and likely emerge progressively 
with age. Our results reinforce the idea that early childhood may be a critical 
time frame for targeted early intervention. A video abstract of this article can 
be viewed at 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r6GUA6my22Q&list=UU3FIcom6UpITHZOIEa8Onnw.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12225
PMID: 25283764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


551. Dev Sci. 2015 May;18(3):452-68. doi: 10.1111/desc.12229. Epub 2014 Sep 11.

Implications of ongoing neural development for the measurement of the 
error-related negativity in childhood.

DuPuis D(1), Ram N, Willner CJ, Karalunas S, Segalowitz SJ, Gatzke-Kopp LM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Development and Family Studies, The Pennsylvania State 
University, USA.

Event-related potentials (ERPs) have been proposed as biomarkers capable of 
reflecting individual differences in neural processing not necessarily 
detectable at the behavioral level. However, the role of ERPs in developmental 
research could be hampered by current methodological approaches to 
quantification. ERPs are extracted as an average waveform over many trials; 
however, actual amplitudes would be misrepresented by an average if there was 
high trial-to-trial variability in signal latency. Low signal temporal 
consistency is thought to be a characteristic of immature neural systems, 
although consistency is not routinely measured in ERP research. The present 
study examined the differential contributions of signal strength and temporal 
consistency across trials in the error-related negativity (ERN) in 6-year-old 
children, as well as the developmental changes that occur in these measures. The 
234 children were assessed annually in kindergarten, 1st, and 2nd grade. At all 
assessments signal strength and temporal consistency were highly correlated with 
the average ERN amplitude, and were not correlated with each other. Consistent 
with previous findings, ERN deflections in the averaged waveform increased with 
age. This was found to be a function of developmental increases in signal 
temporal consistency, whereas signal strength showed a significant decline 
across this time period. In addition, average ERN amplitudes showed 
low-to-moderate stability across the three assessments whereas signal strength 
was highly stable. In contrast, signal temporal consistency did not evidence 
rank-order stability across these ages. Signal strength appears to reflect a 
stable individual trait whereas developmental changes in temporal consistency 
may be experientially influenced.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12229
PMCID: PMC4362874
PMID: 25209462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


552. Dev Sci. 2015 Mar;18(2):270-80. doi: 10.1111/desc.12226. Epub 2014 Aug 13.

Baby steps: investigating the development of perceptual-motor couplings in 
infancy.

de Klerk CC(1), Johnson MH, Heyes CM, Southgate V.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Birkbeck College, University of 
London, UK.

There are cells in our motor cortex that fire both when we perform and when we 
observe similar actions. It has been suggested that these perceptual-motor 
couplings in the brain develop through associative learning during correlated 
sensorimotor experience. Although studies with adult participants have provided 
support for this hypothesis, there is no direct evidence that associative 
learning also underlies the initial formation of perceptual-motor couplings in 
the developing brain. With the present study we addressed this question by 
manipulating infants' opportunities to associate the visual and motor 
representation of a novel action, and by investigating how this influenced their 
sensorimotor cortex activation when they observed this action performed by 
others. Pre-walking 7-9-month-old infants performed stepping movements on an 
infant treadmill while they either observed their own real-time leg movements 
(Contingent group) or the previously recorded leg movements of another infant 
(Non-contingent control group). Infants in a second control group did not 
perform any steps and only received visual experience with the stepping actions. 
Before and after the training period we measured infants' sensorimotor alpha 
suppression, as an index of sensorimotor cortex activation, while they watched 
videos of other infants' stepping actions. While we did not find greater 
sensorimotor alpha suppression following training in the Contingent group as a 
whole, we nevertheless found that the strength of the visuomotor contingency 
experienced during training predicted the amount of sensorimotor alpha 
suppression at post-test in this group. We did not find any effects of motor 
experience alone. These results suggest that the development of perceptual-motor 
couplings in the infant brain is likely to be supported by associative learning 
during correlated visuomotor experience.

© 2014 The Authors Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12226
PMCID: PMC4441281
PMID: 25123212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


553. Dev Sci. 2015 Mar;18(2):254-69. doi: 10.1111/desc.12212. Epub 2014 Jul 16.

The N400 and the fourth grade shift.

Coch D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Education, Dartmouth College, USA.

While behavioral and educational data characterize a fourth grade shift in 
reading development, neuroscience evidence is relatively lacking. We used the 
N400 component of the event-related potential waveform to investigate the 
development of single word processing across the upper elementary years, in 
comparison to adult readers. We presented third graders, fourth graders, fifth 
graders, and college students with a well-controlled list of real words, 
pseudowords, letter strings, false font strings, and animal name targets. Words 
and pseudowords elicited similar N400s across groups. False font strings 
elicited N400s similar to words and letter strings in the three groups of 
children, but not in college students. The pattern of findings suggests 
relatively adult-like semantic and phonological processing by third grade, but a 
long developmental time course, beyond fifth grade, for orthographic processing 
in this context. Thus, the amplitude of the N400 elicited by various word-like 
stimuli does not reflect some sort of shift or discontinuity in word processing 
around the fourth grade. However, the results do suggest different developmental 
time courses for the processes that contribute to automatic single word reading 
and the integrative N400.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12212
PMCID: PMC4297273
PMID: 25041502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


554. Dev Sci. 2015 Mar;18(2):194-205. doi: 10.1111/desc.12198. Epub 2014 Jun 30.

Characterizing the information content of a newly hatched chick's first visual 
object representation.

Wood JN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, USA.

How does object recognition emerge in the newborn brain? To address this 
question, I examined the information content of the first visual object 
representation built by newly hatched chicks (Gallus gallus). In their first 
week of life, chicks were raised in controlled-rearing chambers that contained a 
single virtual object rotating around a single axis. In their second week of 
life, I tested whether subjects had encoded information about the identity and 
viewpoint of the virtual object. The results showed that chicks built object 
representations that contained both object identity information and 
view-specific information. However, there was a trade-off between these two 
types of information: subjects who were more sensitive to identity information 
were less sensitive to view-specific information, and vice versa. This pattern 
of results is predicted by iterative, hierarchically organized visual processing 
machinery, the machinery that supports object recognition in adult primates. 
More generally, this study shows that invariant object recognition is a core 
cognitive ability that can be operational at the onset of visual object 
experience.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12198
PMID: 24980274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


555. Dev Sci. 2015 Jan;18(1):165-74. doi: 10.1111/desc.12204. Epub 2014 Jun 27.

Cross-cultural investigation into cognitive underpinnings of individual 
differences in early arithmetic.

Rodic M(1), Zhou X, Tikhomirova T, Wei W, Malykh S, Ismatulina V, Sabirova E, 
Davidova Y, Tosto MG, Lemelin JP, Kovas Y.

Author information:
(1)InLab, Department of Psychology, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK; 
Laboratory for Cognitive Investigations and Behavioural Genetics, Tomsk State 
University, Russia.

The present study evaluated 626 5-7-year-old children in the UK, China, Russia, 
and Kyrgyzstan on a cognitive test battery measuring: (1) general skills; (2) 
non-symbolic number sense; (3) symbolic number understanding; (4) simple 
arithmetic - operating with numbers; and (5) familiarity with numbers. Although 
most inter-population differences were small, 13% of the variance in arithmetic 
skills could be explained by the sample, replicating the pattern, previously 
found with older children in PISA. Furthermore, the same cognitive skills were 
related to early arithmetic in these diverse populations. Only understanding of 
symbolic number explained variation in mathematical performance in all samples. 
We discuss the results in terms of potential influences of socio-demographic, 
linguistic and genetic factors on individual differences in mathematics.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12204
PMID: 24976482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


556. Dev Sci. 2015 Mar;18(2):281-97. doi: 10.1111/desc.12195. Epub 2014 Jun 18.

Parent support is less effective in buffering cortisol stress reactivity for 
adolescents compared to children.

Hostinar CE(1), Johnson AE, Gunnar MR.

Author information:
(1)Cells to Society - The Center on Social Disparities and Health, Institute for 
Policy Research, Northwestern University, USA; Institute of Child Development, 
University of Minnesota, USA.

The goal of the present study was to investigate developmental differences in 
the effectiveness of parent support to alleviate hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal 
(HPA) axis stress responses of children (ages 9-10, N = 40) and adolescents 
(ages 15-16, N = 41). We experimentally manipulated the provision of parent 
support during the speech preparation period before a modified Trier Social 
Stress Test (TSST) and examined its effect on levels of salivary cortisol 
secreted in response to this laboratory stressor. Analyses revealed a 
significant interaction of condition and age group such that social support from 
the parent (versus a stranger) significantly eliminated the cortisol stress 
response in children, but had no effect on the response among adolescents.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12195
PMCID: PMC4270957
PMID: 24942038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


557. Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):1012-28. doi: 10.1111/desc.12194. Epub 2014 Jun 9.

Fathers' versus mothers' social referencing signals in relation to infant 
anxiety and avoidance: a visual cliff experiment.

Möller EL(1), Majdandžić M, Bögels SM.

Author information:
(1)Research Institute of Child Development and Education, University of 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Infants use signals from others to guide their behavior when confronted with 
novel situations, a process called 'social referencing' (SR). Via SR, signs of 
parental anxiety can lead to infant anxiety. Little is known about differences 
in the effect of paternal and maternal SR signals on child anxiety. Using a 
visual cliff paradigm, we studied whether SR processes between fathers and their 
infants differed from mothers and their infants. Eighty-one infants aged 
10-15 months were randomly assigned to conduct the visual cliff task with their 
father (n = 41) or mother (n = 40). The infant was placed on the shallow side of 
the cliff and the parent, standing at the deep side, was instructed to encourage 
the infant to cross. Results showed that although mothers showed more intense 
facial expressions of encouragement than fathers, no differences occurred in how 
fast, and with how much anxiety, infants crossed the cliff with fathers and 
mothers. However, path analyses showed that paternal, but not maternal, 
expressed anxiety was positively associated with infant expressed anxiety and 
avoidance. For infants who participated with their mother, infants' anxious 
temperament was negatively associated with infant avoidance of the cliff. Infant 
anxious temperament moderated the link between paternal expressed anxiety and 
infant avoidance: the higher the level of infant anxious temperament the 
stronger the positive association between paternal expressed anxiety and 
infant's avoidance of the cliff. Lastly, parental encouragement was unrelated to 
infant expressed anxiety and avoidance. Our results suggest that SR processes 
between fathers and their infants differ from those between mothers and their 
infants.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12194
PMID: 24909521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


558. Dev Sci. 2014 Jul;17(4):525-36. doi: 10.1111/desc.12166. Epub 2014 May 4.

Children's cognitive representation of the mathematical number line.

Rouder JN(1), Geary DC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Missouri, USA.

Learning of the mathematical number line has been hypothesized to be dependent 
on an inherent sense of approximate quantity. Children's number line placements 
are predicted to conform to the underlying properties of this system; 
specifically, placements are exaggerated for small numerals and compressed for 
larger ones. Alternative hypotheses are based on proportional reasoning; 
specifically, numerals are placed relative to set anchors such as end points on 
the line. Traditional testing of these alternatives involves fitting group 
medians to corresponding regression models which assumes homogenous residuals 
and thus does not capture useful information from between- and within-child 
variation in placements across the number line. To more fully assess 
differential predictions, we developed a novel set of hierarchical statistical 
models that enable the simultaneous estimation of mean levels of and variation 
in performance, as well as developmental transitions. Using these techniques we 
fitted the number line placements of 224 children longitudinally assessed from 
first to fifth grade, inclusive. The compression pattern was evident in mean 
performance in first grade, but was the best fit for only 20% of first graders 
when the full range of variation in the data are modeled. Most first graders' 
placements suggested use of end points, consistent with proportional reasoning. 
Developmental transition involved incorporation of a mid-point anchor, 
consistent with a modified proportional reasoning strategy. The methodology 
introduced here enables a more nuanced assessment of children's number line 
representation and learning than any previous approaches and indicates that 
developmental improvement largely results from midpoint segmentation of the 
line.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12166
PMCID: PMC4439402
PMID: 24796511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


559. Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):984-90. doi: 10.1111/desc.12180. Epub 2014 Apr 23.

Teaching moral reasoning through gesture.

Beaudoin-Ryan L(1), Goldin-Meadow S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, USA.

Stem-cell research. Euthanasia. Personhood. Marriage equality. School shootings. 
Gun control. Death penalty. Ethical dilemmas regularly spark fierce debate about 
the underlying moral fabric of societies. How do we prepare today's children to 
be fully informed and thoughtful citizens, capable of moral and ethical 
decisions? Current approaches to moral education are controversial, requiring 
adults to serve as either direct ('top-down') or indirect ('bottom-up') conduits 
of information about morality. A common thread weaving throughout these two 
educational initiatives is the ability to take multiple perspectives - increases 
in perspective taking ability have been found to precede advances in moral 
reasoning. We propose gesture as a behavior uniquely situated to augment 
perspective taking ability. Requiring gesture during spatial tasks has been 
shown to catalyze the production of more sophisticated problem-solving 
strategies, allowing children to profit from instruction. Our data demonstrate 
that requiring gesture during moral reasoning tasks has similar effects, 
resulting in increased perspective taking ability subsequent to instruction. A 
video abstract of this article can be viewed at 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v/gAcRIClU_GY.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12180
PMCID: PMC4207722
PMID: 24754707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


560. Dev Sci. 2015 Jan;18(1):155-64. doi: 10.1111/desc.12182. Epub 2014 Apr 16.

Why the body comes first: effects of experimenter touch on infants' word 
finding.

Seidl A(1), Tincoff R, Baker C, Cristia A.

Author information:
(1)Speech, Language and Hearing Sciences, Purdue University, USA.

The lexicon of 6-month-olds is comprised of names and body part words. Unlike 
names, body part words do not often occur in isolation in the input. This 
presents a puzzle: How have infants been able to pull out these words from the 
continuous stream of speech at such a young age? We hypothesize that caregivers' 
interactions directed at and on the infant's body may be at the root of their 
early acquisition of body part words. An artificial language segmentation study 
shows that experimenter-provided synchronous tactile cues help 4-month-olds to 
find words in continuous speech. A follow-up study suggests that this 
facilitation cannot be reduced to the highly social situation in which the 
directed interaction occurs. Taken together, these studies suggest that direct 
caregiver-infant interaction, exemplified in this study by touch cues, may play 
a key role in infants' ability to find word boundaries, and suggests that early 
vocabulary items may consist of words often linked with caregiver touches. A 
video abstract of this article can be viewed at http://youtu.be/NfCj5ipatyE.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12182
PMID: 24734895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


561. Dev Sci. 2014 Mar;17(2):248-56. doi: 10.1111/desc.12103.

Pity or peanuts? Oxytocin induces different neural responses to the same infant 
crying labeled as sick or bored.

Riem MM, Voorthuis A, Bakermans-Kranenburg MJ, van Ijzendoorn MH.

The neuropeptide oxytocin plays an important role in mother–infant bonding. 
However, recent studies indicate that the effects of oxytocin on prosociality 
are dependent on perceived social context. Using functional magnetic resonance 
imaging, we examined differential effects of intranasally administered oxytocin 
on neural responding to 500 and 700 Hz crying that was indicated as emanating 
from a sick infant and 500 and 700 Hz crying emanating from a bored infant. We 
found that oxytocin significantly increased insula and inferior frontal gyrus 
responding to sick infant crying, but decreased activation in these brain 
regions during exposure to crying of an infant that was labeled as bored. In 
addition, oxytocin decreased amygdala responding to 500 Hz crying, but increased 
amygdala responding to 700 Hz crying. These findings indicate that labeling the 
same infant crying as 'sick' or as 'bored' drastically changes neural activity 
in response to intranasal oxytocin administration. Oxytocin increases empathic 
reactions to sick infants' crying, but lowers the perceived urgency of crying of 
an infant perceived as bored, thus flexibly adapting adult responses to infant 
crying labeled in various ways.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12103
PMID: 24734297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


562. Dev Sci. 2015 Jan;18(1):65-79. doi: 10.1111/desc.12179. Epub 2014 Apr 11.

Words, shape, visual search and visual working memory in 3-year-old children.

Vales C(1), Smith LB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, USA.

Do words cue children's visual attention, and if so, what are the relevant 
mechanisms? Across four experiments, 3-year-old children (N = 163) were tested 
in visual search tasks in which targets were cued with only a visual preview 
versus a visual preview and a spoken name. The experiments were designed to 
determine whether labels facilitated search times and to examine one route 
through which labels could have their effect: By influencing the visual working 
memory representation of the target. The targets and distractors were pictures 
of instances of basic-level known categories and the labels were the common name 
for the target category. We predicted that the label would enhance the visual 
working memory representation of the target object, guiding attention to objects 
that better matched the target representation. Experiments 1 and 2 used 
conjunctive search tasks, and Experiment 3 varied shape discriminability between 
targets and distractors. Experiment 4 compared the effects of labels to repeated 
presentations of the visual target, which should also influence the working 
memory representation of the target. The overall pattern fits contemporary 
theories of how the contents of visual working memory interact with visual 
search and attention, and shows that even in very young children heard words 
affect the processing of visual information.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12179
PMCID: PMC4213355
PMID: 24720802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


563. Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):920-34. doi: 10.1111/desc.12176. Epub 2014 Apr 7.

Egocentric and allocentric navigation strategies in Williams syndrome and 
typical development.

Broadbent HJ(1), Farran EK, Tolmie A.

Author information:
(1)Psychology and Human Development, Institute of Education, University of 
London, UK.

Recent findings suggest that difficulties on small-scale visuospatial tasks 
documented in Williams syndrome (WS) also extend to large-scale space. In 
particular, individuals with WS often present with difficulties in allocentric 
spatial coding (encoding relationships between items within an environment or 
array). This study examined the effect of atypical spatial processing in WS on 
large-scale navigational strategies, using a novel 3D virtual environment. 
During navigation of recently learnt large-scale space, typically developing 
(TD) children predominantly rely on the use of a sequential egocentric strategy 
(recalling the sequence of left-right body turns throughout a route), but become 
more able to use an allocentric strategy between 5 and 10 years of age. The 
navigation strategies spontaneously employed by TD children between 5 and 10 
years of age and individuals with WS were analysed. The ability to use an 
allocentric strategy on trials where spatial relational knowledge was required 
to find the shortest route was also examined. Results showed that, unlike TD 
children, during spontaneous navigation the WS group did not predominantly 
employ a sequential egocentric strategy. Instead, individuals with WS followed 
the path until the correct environmental landmarks were found, suggesting the 
use of a time-consuming and inefficient view-matching strategy for wayfinding. 
Individuals with WS also presented with deficits in allocentric spatial coding, 
demonstrated by difficulties in determining short-cuts when required and 
difficulties developing a mental representation of the environment layout. This 
was found even following extensive experience in an environment, suggesting that 
- unlike in typical development - experience cannot contribute to the 
development of spatial relational processing in WS. This atypical presentation 
of both egocentric and allocentric spatial encoding is discussed in relation to 
specific difficulties on small-scale spatial tasks and known atypical cortical 
development in WS.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12176
PMID: 24702907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


564. Dev Sci. 2014 Sep;17(5):786-96. doi: 10.1111/desc.12167. Epub 2014 Mar 17.

Neural bases of Theory of Mind in children with autism spectrum disorders and 
children with conduct problems and callous-unemotional traits.

O'Nions E(1), Sebastian CL, McCrory E, Chantiluke K, Happé F, Viding E.

Author information:
(1)Developmental Risk & Resilience Unit, Clinical, Educational, and Health 
Psychology Research Department, University College London, UK.

Individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) have difficulty understanding 
other minds (Theory of Mind; ToM), with atypical processing evident at both 
behavioural and neural levels. Individuals with conduct problems and high levels 
of callous-unemotional (CU) traits (CP/HCU) exhibit reduced responsiveness to 
others' emotions and difficulties interacting with others, but nonetheless 
perform normally in experimental tests of ToM. The present study aimed to 
examine the neural underpinnings of ToM in children (aged 10-16) with ASD (N = 
16), CP/HCU (N = 16) and typically developing (TD) controls (N = 16) using a 
non-verbal cartoon vignette task. Whilst individuals with ASD were predicted to 
show reduced fMRI responses across regions involved in ToM processing, CP/HCU 
individuals were predicted to show no differences compared with TD controls. The 
analyses indicated that neural responses did not differ between TD and CP/HCU 
groups during ToM. TD and CP/HCU children exhibited significantly greater medial 
prefrontal cortex responses during ToM than did the ASD group. Within the ASD 
group, responses in medial prefrontal cortex and right temporoparietal junction 
(TPJ) correlated with symptom severity as measured by the Autism Diagnostic 
Observation Schedule (ADOS). Findings suggest that although both ASD and CP/HCU 
are characterized by social difficulties, only children with ASD display 
atypical neural processing associated with ToM.

© 2014 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12167
PMCID: PMC4316185
PMID: 24636205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


565. Dev Sci. 2014 May;17(3):424-33. doi: 10.1111/desc.12132. Epub 2014 Mar 13.

A matter of time: rapid motor memory stabilization in childhood.

Adi-Japha E(1), Badir R, Dorfberger S, Karni A.

Author information:
(1)School of Education and the Gonda (Goldschmied) Multidisciplinary Brain 
Research Center, Bar-Ilan University, Israel.

Are children better than adults in acquiring new skills ('how-to' knowledge) 
because of a difference in skill memory consolidation? Here we tested the 
proposal that, as opposed to adults, children's memories for newly acquired 
skills are immune to interference by subsequent experience. The establishment of 
long-term memory for a trained movement sequence in adults requires a phase of 
memory consolidation. This results in substantial delayed, 'offline', 
performance gains, which nevertheless remain susceptible to interference by 
subsequent competing motor experience for several hours after training, unless 
sleep is afforded in the interval. Here we compared the gains attained overnight 
(delayed gains) by 9-year-olds and adults after training on a novel 
finger-to-thumb movement sequence, with and without subsequent interference by 
repeating a different movement sequence. Our results show that, in 9-year-olds, 
but not in adults, an interval of 15 min. between the training session and 
interfering experience sufficed to ensure the expression of delayed, 
consolidation phase, gains. Nevertheless, in the 9-year-olds, as well as in 
adults, the gains attained with no interference were significantly larger. 
Altogether, our results show that while the behavioral expressions of childhood 
and adult consolidation processes are similar, procedural memory stabilizes, in 
the waking state, at a much faster rate in children. We propose that, in 
children, rapid stabilization is a mechanism whereby the constraints on 
consolidating new experiences into long-term procedural memory are relaxed at 
the cost of selectivity.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12132
PMID: 24620995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


566. Dev Sci. 2014 Sep;17(5):727-42. doi: 10.1111/desc.12153. Epub 2014 Mar 1.

The roles of family history of dyslexia, language, speech production and 
phonological processing in predicting literacy progress.

Carroll JM(1), Mundy IR, Cunningham AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Warwick, UK.

It is well established that speech, language and phonological skills are closely 
associated with literacy, and that children with a family risk of dyslexia (FRD) 
tend to show deficits in each of these areas in the preschool years. This paper 
examines what the relationships are between FRD and these skills, and whether 
deficits in speech, language and phonological processing fully account for the 
increased risk of dyslexia in children with FRD. One hundred and fifty-three 
4-6-year-old children, 44 of whom had FRD, completed a battery of speech, 
language, phonology and literacy tasks. Word reading and spelling were retested 
6 months later, and text reading accuracy and reading comprehension were tested 
3 years later. The children with FRD were at increased risk of developing 
difficulties in reading accuracy, but not reading comprehension. Four groups 
were compared: good and poor readers with and without FRD. In most cases good 
readers outperformed poor readers regardless of family history, but there was an 
effect of family history on naming and nonword repetition regardless of literacy 
outcome, suggesting a role for speech production skills as an endophenotype of 
dyslexia. Phonological processing predicted spelling, while language predicted 
text reading accuracy and comprehension. FRD was a significant additional 
predictor of reading and spelling after controlling for speech production, 
language and phonological processing, suggesting that children with FRD show 
additional difficulties in literacy that cannot be fully explained in terms of 
their language and phonological skills.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12153
PMID: 24581037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


567. Dev Sci. 2014 May;17(3):338-51. doi: 10.1111/desc.12124. Epub 2014 Jan 11.

Some views are better than others: evidence for a visual bias in object views 
self-generated by toddlers.

James KH(1), Jones SS, Swain S, Pereira A, Smith LB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, Indiana University, USA.

How objects are held determines how they are seen, and may thereby play an 
important developmental role in building visual object representations. Previous 
research suggests that toddlers, like adults, show themselves a disproportionate 
number of planar object views - that is, views in which the objects' axes of 
elongation are perpendicular or parallel to the line of sight. Here, three 
experiments address three explanations of this bias: (1) that the locations of 
interesting features of objects determine how they are held and thus how they 
are viewed; (2) that ease of holding determines object views; and (3) that there 
is a visual bias for planar views that exists independently of holding and of 
interesting surface properties. Children 18 to 24 months of age manually and 
visually explored novel objects (1) with interesting features centered in planar 
or ¾ views; (2) positioned inside Plexiglas boxes so that holding biased either 
planar or non-planar views; and (3) positioned inside Plexiglas spheres, so that 
no object properties directly influenced holding. Results indicate a visual bias 
for planar views that is influenced by interesting surface properties and ease 
of holding, but that continues to exist even when these factors push for 
alternative views.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12124
PMCID: PMC3997616
PMID: 24410976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


568. Dev Sci. 2014 May;17(3):462-70. doi: 10.1111/desc.12138. Epub 2014 Jan 11.

Why do spatial abilities predict mathematical performance?

Tosto MG(1), Hanscombe KB, Haworth CM, Davis OS, Petrill SA, Dale PS, Malykh S, 
Plomin R, Kovas Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of York, UK; Laboratory for Cognitive 
Investigations and Behavioural Genetics, Tomsk State University, Russia.

Spatial ability predicts performance in mathematics and eventual expertise in 
science, technology and engineering. Spatial skills have also been shown to rely 
on neuronal networks partially shared with mathematics. Understanding the nature 
of this association can inform educational practices and intervention for 
mathematical underperformance. Using data on two aspects of spatial ability and 
three domains of mathematical ability from 4174 pairs of 12-year-old twins, we 
examined the relative genetic and environmental contributions to variation in 
spatial ability and to its relationship with different aspects of mathematics. 
Environmental effects explained most of the variation in spatial ability (~70%) 
and in mathematical ability (~60%) at this age, and the effects were the same 
for boys and girls. Genetic factors explained about 60% of the observed 
relationship between spatial ability and mathematics, with a substantial portion 
of the relationship explained by common environmental influences (26% and 14% by 
shared and non-shared environments respectively). These findings call for 
further research aimed at identifying specific environmental mediators of the 
spatial-mathematics relationship.

© 2014 The Authors Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12138
PMCID: PMC3997754
PMID: 24410830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


569. Dev Sci. 2014 Mar;17(2):212-23. doi: 10.1111/desc.12123. Epub 2014 Jan 4.

Differential influence of safe versus threatening facial expressions on 
decision-making during an inhibitory control task in adolescence and adulthood.

Cohen-Gilbert JE(1), Killgore WD, White CN, Schwab ZJ, Crowley DJ, Covell MJ, 
Sneider JT, Silveri MM.

Author information:
(1)Neurodevelopmental Lab, McLean Imaging Center, McLean Hospital, Belmont, USA; 
Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, USA.

Social cognition matures dramatically during adolescence and into early 
adulthood, supported by continued improvements in inhibitory control. During 
this time, developmental changes in interpreting and responding to social 
signals such as facial expressions also occur. In the present study, subjects 
performed a Go No-Go task that required them to respond or inhibit responding 
based on threat or safety cues present in facial expressions. Subjects (N = 112) 
were divided into three age groups: adolescent (12-15 years), emerging adult 
(18-25 years) and adult (26-44 years). Analyses revealed a significant 
improvement in accuracy on No-Go trials, but not Go trials, during both safe and 
threat face conditions, with changes evident through early adulthood. In order 
to better identify the decision-making processes responsible for these changes 
in inhibitory control, a drift diffusion model (DDM) was fit to the accuracy and 
reaction time data, generating measures of caution, response bias, nondecision 
time (encoding + motor response), and drift rate (face processing efficiency). 
Caution and nondecision time both increased significantly with age while bias 
towards the Go response decreased. Drift rate analyses revealed significant 
age-related improvements in the ability to map threat faces to a No-Go response 
while drift rates on all other trial types were equivalent across age groups. 
These results suggest that both stimulus-independent and stimulus-dependent 
processes contribute to improvements in inhibitory control in adolescence with 
processing of negative social cues being specifically impaired by 
self-regulatory demands. Findings from this novel investigation of emotional 
responsiveness integrated with inhibitory control may provide useful insights 
about healthy development that can be applied to better understand adolescent 
risk-taking behavior and the elevated incidence of related forms of 
psychopathology during this period of life.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12123
PMCID: PMC4465543
PMID: 24387267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


570. Dev Sci. 2014 Jan;17(1):79-85. doi: 10.1111/desc.12101. Epub 2013 Nov 6.

Adolescent mice, unlike adults, consume more alcohol in the presence of peers 
than alone.

Logue S(1), Chein J, Gould T, Holliday E, Steinberg L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Temple University, USA.

One hallmark of adolescent risk-taking is that it typically occurs when 
adolescents are with peers. It has been hypothesized that the presence of peers 
primes a reward-sensitive motivational state that overwhelms adolescents' 
immature capacity for inhibitory control. We examined this hypothesis using a 
rodent model. A sample of mice were raised in same-sex triads and were tested 
for alcohol consumption either as juveniles or as adults, with half in each age 
group tested alone and half tested with their cagemates. The presence of 'peers' 
increased alcohol consumption among adolescent mice, but not adults. The peer 
effect on human adolescent reward-seeking may reflect a hard-wired, 
evolutionarily conserved process through which the presence of agemates 
increases individuals' sensitivity to potential rewards in their immediate 
environment.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12101
PMCID: PMC3869041
PMID: 24341974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


571. Dev Sci. 2014 Jan;17(1):35-46. doi: 10.1111/desc.12090. Epub 2013 Sep 13.

Here's looking at you, kid: attention to infant emotional faces in mothers and 
non-mothers.

Thompson-Booth C(1), Viding E, Mayes LC, Rutherford HJ, Hodsoll S, McCrory EJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Psychology and Language Sciences, University College London, UK.

Infant facial cues play a critical role in eliciting care and nurturance from an 
adult caregiver. Using an attentional capture paradigm we investigated 
attentional processing of adult and infant emotional facial expressions in a 
sample of mothers (n = 29) and non-mothers (n = 37) to determine whether infant 
faces were associated with greater task interference. Responses to infant target 
stimuli were slower than adult target stimuli in both groups. This effect was 
modulated by parental status, such that mothers compared to non-mothers showed 
longer response times to infant compared to adult faces. Both groups also 
responded more slowly to emotional faces, an effect that was more marked for 
infant emotional faces. Finally, it was found that greater levels of mothers' 
self-reported parental distress was associated with less task interference when 
processing infant faces. These findings indicate that for adult women, infant 
faces in general and emotional infant faces in particular, preferentially engage 
attention compared to adult faces. However, for mothers, infant faces appear to 
be more salient in general. Therefore, infant faces may constitute a special 
class of social stimuli. We suggest that alterations in attentional processing 
in motherhood may constitute an adaptive behavioural change associated with 
becoming a parent.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12090
PMCID: PMC4352331
PMID: 24341972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


572. Dev Sci. 2014 Mar;17(2):257-69. doi: 10.1111/desc.12112. Epub 2013 Dec 14.

The bonnie baby: experimentally manipulated temperament affects perceived 
cuteness and motivation to view infant faces.

Parsons CE(1), Young KS, Bhandari R, van Ijzendoorn MH, Bakermans-Kranenburg MJ, 
Stein A, Kringelbach ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, UK; Centre of Functionally 
Integrative Neuroscience, Aarhus University, DK.

Attractive individuals are perceived as having various positive personality 
qualities. Positive personality qualities can in turn increase perceived 
attractiveness. However, the developmental origins of the link between 
attractiveness and personality are not understood. This is important because 
infant attractiveness ('cuteness') elicits caregiving from adults, and infant 
personality ('temperament') shapes caregiving behaviour. While research suggests 
that adults have more positive attitudes towards cuter infants, it is not known 
whether positive infant temperament can increase the perception of infant 
cuteness. We investigated the impact of experimentally established infant 
temperament on adults' perception of cuteness and desire to view individual 
faces. Ataseline, adults rated the cuteness of, and keypressed to view, images 
of unfamiliar infants with neutral facial expressions. Training required adults 
to learn about an infant's 'temperament', through repeated pairing of the 
neutral infant face with positive or negative facial expressions and 
vocalizations. Adults then re-rated the original neutral infant faces. 
Post-training, there were significant changes from baseline: infants who were 
mostly happy were perceived as cuter and adults expended greater effort to view 
them. Infants who were mostly sad were not perceived as cuter and adults 
expended less effort to view them. Our results suggest that temperament has 
clear consequences for how adults perceive 'bonnie' babies. Perception of infant 
cuteness is not based on physical facial features alone, and is modifiable 
through experience.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12112
PMID: 24330495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


573. Dev Sci. 2014 Jul;17(4):596-611. doi: 10.1111/desc.12141. Epub 2013 Dec 7.

Face engagement during infancy predicts later face recognition ability in 
younger siblings of children with autism.

de Klerk CC(1), Gliga T, Charman T, Johnson MH; BASIS team.

Collaborators: Baron-Cohen S, Bolton P, Chandler S, Fernandes J, Elsabbagh M, 
Garwood H, Hudry K, Pasco G, Pickles A, Tucker L, Volein A.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Birbeck College, University of 
London, UK.

Face recognition difficulties are frequently documented in children with autism 
spectrum disorders (ASD). It has been hypothesized that these difficulties 
result from a reduced interest in faces early in life, leading to decreased 
cortical specialization and atypical development of the neural circuitry for 
face processing. However, a recent study by our lab demonstrated that infants at 
increased familial risk for ASD, irrespective of their diagnostic status at 3 
years, exhibit a clear orienting response to faces. The present study was 
conducted as a follow-up on the same cohort to investigate how measures of early 
engagement with faces relate to face-processing abilities later in life. We also 
investigated whether face recognition difficulties are specifically related to 
an ASD diagnosis, or whether they are present at a higher rate in all those at 
familial risk. At 3 years we found a reduced ability to recognize unfamiliar 
faces in the high-risk group that was not specific to those children who 
received an ASD diagnosis, consistent with face recognition difficulties being 
an endophenotype of the disorder. Furthermore, we found that longer looking at 
faces at 7 months was associated with poorer performance on the face recognition 
task at 3 years in the high-risk group. These findings suggest that longer 
looking at faces in infants at risk for ASD might reflect early face-processing 
difficulties and predicts difficulties with recognizing faces later in life.

© 2013 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12141
PMID: 24314028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


574. Dev Sci. 2014 Mar;17(2):282-97. doi: 10.1111/desc.12109. Epub 2013 Nov 28.

Enhanced development of auditory change detection in musically trained 
school-aged children: a longitudinal event-related potential study.

Putkinen V(1), Tervaniemi M, Saarikivi K, Ojala P, Huotilainen M.

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Brain Research Unit, Cognitive Science, Institute of Behavioural 
Sciences, University of Helsinki, Finland; Finnish Centre of Excellence for 
Interdisciplinary Music Research, University of Jyväskylä, Finland.

Adult musicians show superior auditory discrimination skills when compared to 
non-musicians. The enhanced auditory skills of musicians are reflected in the 
augmented amplitudes of their auditory event-related potential (ERP) responses. 
In the current study, we investigated longitudinally the development of auditory 
discrimination skills in musically trained and nontrained individuals. To this 
end, we recorded the mismatch negativity (MMN) and P3a responses from children 
who play a musical instrument and age-matched children with no musical training 
at ages 7, 9, 11, and 13. Basic auditory processing was investigated by 
recording ERPs in the Multi-Feature Paradigm that included frequency, duration, 
intensity, location, and gap deviants. The detection of musically more relevant 
sound changes was examined in an oddball paradigm with major chords as standards 
and minor chords as deviants. The musically trained children showed larger 
increase in MMN and P3a amplitudes with age for the chord deviants than the 
control children. There was also a strong trend (p = .054) for larger increase 
in MMN amplitude in the musically trained children for the location deviant. As 
no group differences in response amplitudes were evident at the early stages of 
the training, our results suggest that the superior neural auditory 
discrimination in adult musicians is due to training and not pre-existing 
differences between musicians and non-musicians.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12109
PMID: 24283257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


575. Dev Sci. 2014 Mar;17(2):161-74. doi: 10.1111/desc.12106. Epub 2013 Nov 11.

Different early rearing experiences have long-term effects on cortical 
organization in captive chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes).

Bogart SL(1), Bennett AJ, Schapiro SJ, Reamer LA, Hopkins WD.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Institute and the Language Research Center, Georgia State 
University, USA; Division of Developmental and Cognitive Neuroscience, Yerkes 
National Primate Research Center, USA; Department of Anthropology, Lawrence 
University, USA.

Consequences of rearing history in chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) have been 
explored in relation to behavioral abnormalities and cognition; however, little 
is known about the effects of rearing conditions on anatomical brain 
development. Human studies have revealed that experiences of maltreatment and 
neglect during infancy and childhood can have detrimental effects on brain 
development and cognition. In this study, we evaluated the effects of early 
rearing experience on brain morphology in 92 captive chimpanzees (ages 11-43) 
who were either reared by their mothers (n = 46) or in a nursery (n = 46) with 
age-group peers. Magnetic resonance brain images were analyzed with a processing 
program (BrainVISA) that extracts cortical sulci. We obtained various 
measurements from 11 sulci located throughout the brain, as well as whole brain 
gyrification and white and grey matter volumes. We found that mother-reared 
chimpanzees have greater global white-to-grey matter volume, more cortical 
folding and thinner grey matter within the cortical folds than nursery-reared 
animals. The findings reported here are the first to demonstrate that 
differences in early rearing conditions have significant consequences on brain 
morphology in chimpanzees and suggests potential differences in the development 
of white matter expansion and myelination.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12106
PMCID: PMC3959747
PMID: 24206013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


576. Dev Sci. 2014 Jan;17(1):142-58. doi: 10.1111/desc.12100. Epub 2013 Nov 11.

Enculturation to musical pitch structure in young children: evidence from 
behavioral and electrophysiological methods.

Corrigall KA(1), Trainor LJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Neuroscience & Behaviour, McMaster University, 
Canada.

Children learn the structure of the music of their culture similarly to how they 
learn the language to which they are exposed in their daily environment. 
Furthermore, as with language, children acquire this musical knowledge without 
formal instruction. Two critical aspects of musical pitch structure in Western 
tonal music are key membership (understanding which notes belong in a key and 
which do not) and harmony (understanding which notes combine to form chords and 
which notes and chords tend to follow others). The early developmental 
trajectory of the acquisition of this knowledge remains unclear, in part because 
of the difficulty of testing young children. In two experiments, we investigated 
4- and 5-year-olds' enculturation to Western musical pitch using a novel 
age-appropriate and engaging behavioral task (Experiment 1) and 
electroencephalography (EEG; Experiment 2). In Experiment 1 we found behavioral 
evidence that 5-year-olds were sensitive to key membership but not to harmony, 
and no evidence that 4-year-olds were sensitive to either. However, in 
Experiment 2 we found neurophysiological evidence that 4-year-olds were 
sensitive to both key membership and harmony. Our results suggest that musical 
enculturation has a long developmental trajectory, and that children may have 
some knowledge of key membership and harmony before that knowledge can be 
expressed through explicit behavioral judgments.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12100
PMID: 24205955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


577. Dev Sci. 2013 Nov;16(6):926-40. doi: 10.1111/desc.12084. Epub 2013 Jul 30.

Selective memories: infants' encoding is enhanced in selection via suppression.

Markant J(1), Amso D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, and Psychological Sciences, Brown 
University, USA.

The present study examined the hypothesis that inhibitory visual selection 
mechanisms play a vital role in memory by limiting distractor interference 
during item encoding. In Experiment 1a we used a modified spatial cueing task in 
which 9-month-old infants encoded multiple category exemplars in the contexts of 
an attention orienting mechanism involving suppression (i.e. inhibition of 
return, IOR) versus one that does not (i.e. facilitation). At test, infants in 
the IOR condition showed both item-specific learning and abstraction of broader 
category information. In contrast, infants in the facilitation condition did not 
discriminate across novel and familiar test items. Experiment 1b confirmed that 
the learning observed in the IOR condition was specific to spatial cueing of 
attention and was not due to timing differences across the IOR and facilitation 
conditions. In Experiment 2, we replicated the results of Experiment 1, using a 
within-subjects design to explicitly examine learning and memory encoding in the 
context of concurrent suppression. These data show that developing inhibitory 
selective attention enhances efficacy of memory encoding for subsequent 
retrieval. Furthermore, these results highlight the importance of considering 
interactions between developing attention and memory systems.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12084
PMCID: PMC3801267
PMID: 24118717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


578. Dev Sci. 2013 Nov;16(6):905-14. doi: 10.1111/desc.12063. Epub 2013 Jun 11.

The neural correlates of processing newborn and adult faces in 3-year-old 
children.

Peykarjou S(1), Westerlund A, Cassia VM, Kuefner D, Nelson CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Biological Psychology, Heidelberg University, 
Germany.

The current study examines the processing of upright and inverted faces in 
3-year-old children (n = 35). Event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded 
during a passive looking paradigm including adult and newborn face stimuli. We 
observed three face-sensitive components, the P1, the N170 and the P400. 
Inverted faces elicited shorter P1 latency and larger P400 amplitude. P1 and 
N170 amplitudes were larger for adult faces. To examine the role of experience 
in the development of face processing, the processing of adult and newborn faces 
was compared for children with a younger sibling (n = 23) and children without a 
younger sibling (n = 12). Age of sibling at test correlated negatively with P1 
amplitude for adult and newborn faces. This may indicate more efficient 
processing of different face ages in children with a younger sibling and 
potentially reflects a more flexible face representation.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12063
PMCID: PMC3801295
PMID: 24118716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


579. Dev Sci. 2013 Nov;16(6):828-40. doi: 10.1111/desc.12070. Epub 2013 May 28.

Selective and faithful imitation at 12 and 15 months.

Hilbrink EE(1), Sakkalou E, Ellis-Davies K, Fowler NC, Gattis M.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Cardiff, UK; Max Planck Institute for 
Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Erratum in
    Dev Sci. 2016 Jan;19(1):175.

Research on imitation in infancy has primarily focused on what and when infants 
imitate. More recently, however, the question why infants imitate has received 
renewed attention, partly motivated by the finding that infants sometimes 
selectively imitate the actions of others and sometimes faithfully imitate, or 
overimitate, the actions of others. The present study evaluates the hypothesis 
that this varying imitative behavior is related to infants' social traits. To do 
so, we assessed faithful and selective imitation longitudinally at 12 and 15 
months, and extraversion at 15 months. At both ages, selective imitation was 
dependent on the causal structure of the act. From 12 to 15 months, selective 
imitation decreased while faithful imitation increased. Furthermore, infants 
high in extraversion were more faithful imitators than infants low in 
extraversion. These results demonstrate that the onset of faithful imitation is 
earlier than previously thought, but later than the onset of selective 
imitation. The observed relation between extraversion and faithful imitation 
supports the hypothesis that faithful imitation is driven by the social 
motivations of the infant. We call this relation the King Louie Effect: like the 
orangutan King Louie in The Jungle Book, infants imitate faithfully due to a 
growing interest in the interpersonal nature of interactions.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12070
PMID: 24118710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


580. Dev Sci. 2014 Jan;17(1):59-70. doi: 10.1111/desc.12092. Epub 2013 Sep 16.

Adolescents let sufficient evidence accumulate before making a decision when 
large incentives are at stake.

Teslovich T(1), Mulder M, Franklin NT, Ruberry EJ, Millner A, Somerville LH, 
Simen P, Durston S, Casey BJ.

Author information:
(1)Sackler Institute, Department of Psychiatry, Weill Cornell Medical College, 
USA.

Adolescent decision-making has been described as impulsive and suboptimal in the 
presence of incentives. In this study we examined the neural substrates of 
adolescent decision-making using a perceptual discrimination task for which 
small and large rewards were associated with correctly detecting the direction 
of motion of a cloud of moving dots. Adults showed a reward bias of faster 
reaction times on trials for which the direction of motion was associated with a 
large reward. Adolescents, in contrast, were slower to make decisions on trials 
associated with large rewards. This behavioral pattern in adolescents was 
paralleled by greater recruitment of fronto-parietal regions important in 
representing the accumulation of evidence sufficient for selecting one choice 
over its alternative and the certainty of that choice. The findings suggest that 
when large incentives are dependent on performance, adolescents may require more 
evidence to accumulate prior to responding, to be certain to maximize their 
gains. Adults, in contrast, appear to be quicker in evaluating the evidence for 
a decision when primed by rewards. Overall these findings suggest that rather 
than reacting hastily, adolescents can be incentivized to take more time to make 
decisions when large rewards are at stake. A video abstract of this article can 
be viewed at http://youtu.be/1g4F5vzFDl0.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12092
PMID: 24102682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


581. Dev Sci. 2013 Sep;16(5):743-59. doi: 10.1111/desc.12056. Epub 2013 Jun 8.

Neural responses to witnessing peer rejection after being socially excluded: 
fMRI as a window into adolescents' emotional processing.

Masten CL(1), Eisenberger NI, Pfeifer JH, Dapretto M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Human Development, Vanderbilt University, USA.

During adolescence, concerns about peer rejection and acceptance become 
increasingly common. Adolescents regularly experience peer rejection firsthand 
and witness these behaviors among their peers. In the current study, 
neuroimaging techniques were employed to conduct a preliminary investigation of 
the affective and cognitive processes involved in witnessing peer acceptance and 
rejection - specifically when these witnessed events occur in the immediate 
aftermath of a firsthand experience with rejection. During an fMRI scan, 23 
adolescents underwent a simulated experience of firsthand peer rejection. Then, 
immediately following this experience they watched as another adolescent was 
ostensibly first accepted and then rejected. Findings indicated that in the 
immediate aftermath of being rejected by peers, adolescents displayed neural 
activity consistent with distress when they saw another peer being accepted, and 
neural activity consistent with emotion regulation and mentalizing (e.g. 
perspective-taking) processes when they saw another peer being rejected. 
Furthermore, individuals displaying a heightened sensitivity to firsthand 
rejection were more likely to show neural activity consistent with distress when 
observing a peer being accepted. Findings are discussed in terms of how 
witnessing others being accepted or rejected relates to adolescents' 
interpretations of both firsthand and observed experiences with peers. In 
addition, the potential impact that witnessed events might have on the broader 
perpetuation of bullying at this age is also considered.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12056
PMCID: PMC3775008
PMID: 24033579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


582. Dev Sci. 2013 Sep;16(5):728-42. doi: 10.1111/desc.12065. Epub 2013 Jun 8.

The effect of early visual deprivation on the development of face detection.

Mondloch CJ(1), Segalowitz SJ, Lewis TL, Dywan J, Le Grand R, Maurer D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Brock University, Canada.

The expertise of adults in face perception is facilitated by their ability to 
rapidly detect that a stimulus is a face. In two experiments, we examined the 
role of early visual input in the development of face detection by testing 
patients who had been treated as infants for bilateral congenital cataract. 
Experiment 1 indicated that, at age 9 to 20, patients' accuracy and response 
times on a Mooney face detection task were normal. Experiment 2 revealed that 
the neural mechanisms underlying face detection in a similar group of adult 
patients are abnormal: the amplitude of both the P100 and N170 event-related 
potential were larger in patients than in visually normal controls, and the 
extent of augmentation was related to the duration of deprivation. Thus, early 
visual experience is necessary for the establishment of normal neural networks 
for face detection; abnormalities at these early processing stages may 
contribute to the deficits we previously reported in configural face processing 
for this patient cohort.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12065
PMID: 24033578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


583. Dev Sci. 2013 Sep;16(5):697-707. doi: 10.1111/desc.12080. Epub 2013 Jul 30.

Linking childhood poverty and cognition: environmental mediators of non-verbal 
executive control in an Argentine sample.

Lipina S(1), Segretin S, Hermida J, Prats L, Fracchia C, Camelo JL, Colombo J.

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Neurobiología Aplicada (UNA, CEMIC-CONICET), Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.

Tests of attentional control, working memory, and planning were administered to 
compare the non-verbal executive control performance of healthy children from 
different socioeconomic backgrounds. In addition, mediations of several 
sociodemographic variables, identified in the literature as part of the 
experience of child poverty, between socioeconomic status and cognitive 
performance were assessed. Results show: (1) significant differences in 
performance between groups in most dependent variables analyzed - however, not 
in all variables associated with attentional control domains; (2) significant 
indirect effects of literacy activities on working memory and fluid processing 
domains, as well as computer resources effects on fluid processing; and (3) 
marginal indirect effects of computer resources on attentional control and 
working memory domains. These findings extend analysis of the impact of poverty 
on the development of executive control, through information based on the 
assessment of combined neurocognitive paradigms and the identification of 
specific environmental mediators.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12080
PMID: 24033575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


584. Dev Sci. 2013 Sep;16(5):665-75. doi: 10.1111/desc.12087. Epub 2013 Aug 7.

What are the links between maternal social status, hippocampal function, and HPA 
axis function in children?

Sheridan MA(1), How J, Araujo M, Schamberg MA, Nelson CA.

Author information:
(1)Harvard Medical School, USA; Children's Hospital Boston, USA; Harvard School 
of Public Health, USA; Harvard Center on the Developing Child, USA.

The association of parental social status with multiple health and achievement 
indicators in adulthood has driven researchers to attempt to identify mechanisms 
by which social experience in childhood could shift developmental trajectories. 
Some accounts for observed linkages between parental social status in childhood 
and health have hypothesized that early stress exposure could result in chronic 
disruptions in hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis activation, and that 
this activation could lead to long-term changes. A robust literature in adult 
animals has demonstrated that chronic HPA axis activation leads to changes in 
hippocampal structure and function. In the current study, consistent with 
studies in animals, we observe an association between both maternal self-rated 
social status and hippocampal activation in children and between maternal 
self-rated social status and salivary cortisol in children.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12087
PMCID: PMC3816744
PMID: 24033572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


585. Dev Sci. 2013 Jul;16(4):622-38. doi: 10.1111/desc.12059. Epub 2013 Jun 1.

When do children trust the expert? Benevolence information influences children's 
trust more than expertise.

Landrum AR(1), Mills CM, Johnston AM.

Author information:
(1)School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences, University of Texas at Dallas, 800 
W. Campbell Road, GR41, Richardson, TX 75080-3021, USA. LandrumAR@gmail.com

How do children use informant niceness, meanness, and expertise when choosing 
between informant claims and crediting informants with knowledge? In Experiment 
1, preschoolers met two experts providing conflicting claims for which only one 
had relevant expertise. Five-year-olds endorsed the relevant expert's claim and 
credited him with knowledge more often than 3-year-olds. In Experiment 2, 
niceness/meanness information was added. Although children most strongly 
preferred the nice relevant expert, the children often chose the nice irrelevant 
expert when the relevant one was mean. In Experiment 3, a mean expert was paired 
with a nice non-expert. Although this nice informant had no expertise, 
preschoolers continued to endorse his claims and credit him with knowledge. Also 
noteworthy, children in all three experiments seemed to struggle more to choose 
the relevant expert's claim than to credit him with knowledge. Together, these 
experiments demonstrate that niceness/meanness information can powerfully 
influence how children evaluate informants.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12059
PMID: 23786479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


586. Dev Sci. 2013 Jul;16(4):610-21. doi: 10.1111/desc.12055. Epub 2013 Apr 10.

Infants hierarchically organize memory representations.

Rosenberg RD(1), Feigenson L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Denison University, Granville, OH 43023, USA. 
rosenbergr@denison.edu

Throughout development, working memory is subject to capacity limits that 
severely constrain short-term storage. However, adults can massively expand the 
total amount of remembered information by grouping items into chunks. Although 
infants also have been shown to chunk objects in memory, little is known 
regarding the limits of this ability. In particular, it remains unknown whether 
infants can create more complex memory hierarchies, binding representations of 
chunks into still larger chunks in recursive fashion. Here we tested the limits 
of early chunking, first measuring the number of items infants can bind into a 
single chunk and the number of chunks infants can maintain concurrently, and 
then, critically, whether infants can embed chunked representations into larger 
units. We tested 14-month-old infants' memory for hidden objects using a manual 
search task in which we manipulated memory load (the number of objects infants 
saw hidden) and the chunking cues provided. We found that infants are limited in 
the number of items they can chunk and in the number of chunks they can 
remember. However, we also found that infants can bind representations of chunks 
into 'superchunks'. These results suggest that hierarchically organizing 
information strongly affects working memory, starting in infancy.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12055
PMID: 23786478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


587. Dev Sci. 2013 Jul;16(4):599-609. doi: 10.1111/desc.12072. Epub 2013 Jun 1.

Developmental changes in memory encoding: insights from event-related 
potentials.

Rollins L(1), Riggins T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Maryland, 1147 Biology/Psychology 
Building, College Park, MD 20742, USA. rollins@umd.edu

The aim of the present study was to investigate developmental changes in 
encoding processes between 6-year-old children and adults using event-related 
potentials (ERPs). Although episodic memory ('EM') effects have been reported in 
both children and adults at retrieval and subsequent memory effects have been 
established in adults, no previous ERP studies have examined subsequent memory 
effects in children. This represents a critical gap in the literature because 
encoding processes, and changes in neural correlates supporting encoding, 
partially account for age-related improvements in children's memory performance. 
Results revealed that subsequent memory effects differed between children and 
adults temporally, directionally, and topographically. These findings lend 
support to the hypothesis that encoding processes and their neural correlates 
are an important source of change in memory development. A video abstract of 
this article can be viewed at http://youtu.be/sH83_qVimgc.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12072
PMID: 23786477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


588. Dev Sci. 2013 May;16(3):476-83. doi: 10.1111/desc.12039. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Cultural differences in the development of processing speed.

Kail RV(1), McBride-Chang C, Ferrer E, Cho JR, Shu H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette IN 
47907, USA. rkail@purdue.edu

The aim of the present work was to examine cultural differences in the 
development of speed of information processing. Four samples of US children 
(N = 509) and four samples of East Asian children (N = 661) completed 
psychometric measures of processing speed on two occasions. Analyses of the 
longitudinal data indicated that, although processing speed was comparable among 
US and East Asian children at the youngest age (~4.5 years), it developed more 
rapidly in some but not all of the East Asian samples. Results are discussed in 
terms of factors that may promote more rapid development of processing speed in 
some East Asian cultures.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12039
PMID: 23587044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


589. Dev Sci. 2013 May;16(3):451-62. doi: 10.1111/desc.12037.

Non-symbolic halving in an Amazonian indigene group.

McCrink K(1), Spelke ES, Dehaene S, Pica P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Barnard College, Columbia University, New York, NY 
10027, USA. kmccrink@barnard.edu

Much research supports the existence of an Approximate Number System (ANS) that 
is recruited by infants, children, adults, and non-human animals to generate 
coarse, non-symbolic representations of number. This system supports simple 
arithmetic operations such as addition, subtraction, and ordering of amounts. 
The current study tests whether an intuition of a more complex calculation, 
division, exists in an indigene group in the Amazon, the Mundurucu, whose 
language includes no words for large numbers. Mundurucu children were presented 
with a video event depicting a division transformation of halving, in which 
pairs of objects turned into single objects, reducing the array's numerical 
magnitude. Then they were tested on their ability to calculate the outcome of 
this division transformation with other large-number arrays. The Mundurucu 
children effected this transformation even when non-numerical variables were 
controlled, performed above chance levels on the very first set of test trials, 
and exhibited performance similar to urban children who had access to precise 
number words and a surrounding symbolic culture. We conclude that a halving 
calculation is part of the suite of intuitive operations supported by the ANS.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12037
PMCID: PMC4063206
PMID: 23587042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


590. Dev Sci. 2013 Mar;16(2):296-313. doi: 10.1111/desc.12030.

Target article with commentaries: developmental niche construction.

Flynn EG(1), Laland KN(2), Kendal RL(3), Kendal JR(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for the Coevolution of Biology and Culture, Department of Psychology, 
Durham University, UK.
(2)School of Biology, University of St Andrews, UK.
(3)Centre for the Coevolution of Biology and Culture, Department of 
Anthropology, Durham University, UK.

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2013 Mar;16(2):314-6.
    Dev Sci. 2013 Mar;16(2):317-9.
    Dev Sci. 2013 Mar;16(2):320-1.
    Dev Sci. 2013 Mar;16(2):322-3.

Niche construction is the modification of components of the environment through 
an organism's activities. Humans modify their environments mainly through 
ontogenetic and cultural processes, and it is this reliance on learning, 
plasticity and culture that lends human niche construction a special potency. In 
this paper we aim to facilitate discussion between researchers interested in 
niche construction and those interested in human cognitive development by 
highlighting some of the related processes. We discuss the transmission of 
culturally relevant information, how the human mind is a symbol-generating and 
artefact-devising system, and how these processes are bi-directional, with 
infants and children both being directed, and directing, their own development. 
We reflect on these in the light of four approaches: natural pedagogy, activity 
theory, distributed cognition and situated learning. Throughout, we highlight 
pertinent examples in non-humans that parallel or further explicate the 
processes discussed. Finally we offer three future directions; two involving the 
use of new techniques in the realms of neuroscience and modelling, and the third 
suggesting exploration of changes in the effects of niche construction across 
the lifespan.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12030
PMID: 23432838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


591. Dev Sci. 2013 Mar;16(2):287-295. doi: 10.1111/desc.12025.

Auditory habituation in the fetus and neonate: an fMEG study.

Muenssinger J(1), Matuz T(1), Schleger F(1), Kiefer-Schmidt I(2), Goelz R(3), 
Wacker-Gussmann A(3), Birbaumer N(4)(5), Preissl H(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)MEG Center, University of Tuebingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Hospital Tuebingen, 
Germany.
(3)Department of Neonatology, University Children's Hospital Tuebingen, Germany.
(4)Institute of Medical Psychology and Behavioral Neurobiology, University of 
Tuebingen, Germany.
(5)IRCCS, Ospedale San Camillo, Venice, Italy.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, USA.

Comment in
    Clin Neurophysiol. 2014 Jan;125(1):210-1.

Habituation--the most basic form of learning--is used to evaluate central 
nervous system (CNS) maturation and to detect abnormalities in fetal brain 
development. In the current study, habituation, stimulus specificity and 
dishabituation of auditory evoked responses were measured in fetuses and 
newborns using fetal magnetoencephalography (fMEG). An auditory habituation 
paradigm consisting of 100 trains of five 500 Hz tones, one 750 Hz tone 
(dishabituator) and two more 500 Hz tones, respectively, were presented to 41 
fetuses (gestational age 30-39 weeks) and 22 newborns or babies (age 6-89 days). 
A response decrement between the first and fifth tones (habituation), an 
increment between the fifth tone and the dishabituator (stimulus specificity) 
and an increment between the fifth (last tone before the dishabituator) and 
seventh tones (first tone after the dishabituator) (dishabituation) were 
expected. Fetuses showed weak responses to the first tone. However, a 
significant response decrement between the second and fifth tones (habituation) 
and a significant increment between the fifth tone and the dishabituator 
(stimulus specificity) were found. No significant difference was found for 
dishabituation nor was a developmental trend found at the group level. From the 
neonatal data, significant values for stimulus specificity were found. Sensory 
fatigue or adaptation was ruled out as a reason for the response decrement due 
to the strong reactions to the dishabituator. Taken together, the current study 
used fMEG to directly show fetal habituation and provides evidence of fetal 
learning in the last trimester of pregnancy.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12025
PMID: 23432837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


592. Dev Sci. 2013 Jan;16(1):124-35. doi: 10.1111/desc.12010. Epub 2012 Nov 20.

Environmental contributions to preschoolers' semantic fluency.

Kavé G(1), Shalmon M, Knafo A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Education and Psychology, The Open University, Raanana, Israel.

Semantic fluency was examined in Hebrew-speaking 5-year-old monozygotic and 
dizygotic twins (N = 396, 198 pairs), 22% of them with mother-reported 
speech-related problems. There were positive correlations of similar magnitudes 
among monozygotic, same-sex dizygotic, and opposite-sex dizygotic twins. 
Analyses showed no genetic effects, alongside significant shared (39%) and 
non-shared environmental (61%) effects on fluency scores. The presence of 
speech-related problems in one twin affected the fluency score of the co-twin. A 
multivariate regression analysis revealed that parental education and length of 
stay at daycare significantly predicted fluency scores. We suggest that semantic 
fluency performance is highly affected by environmental factors at age 5 
although genetic effects might emerge later on.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12010
PMID: 23278934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


593. Dev Sci. 2013 Jan;16(1):111-5. doi: 10.1111/desc.12008.

Language is not necessary for color categories.

Ozturk O(1), Shayan S, Liszkowski U, Majid A.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Language Acquisition Department, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. ozge.ozturk@nyu.edu

Erratum in
    Dev Sci. 2014 Jul;17(4):644.

The origin of color categories is under debate. Some researchers argue that 
color categories are linguistically constructed, while others claim they have a 
pre-linguistic, and possibly even innate, basis. Although there is some evidence 
that 4-6-month-old infants respond categorically to color, these empirical 
results have been challenged in recent years. First, it has been claimed that 
previous demonstrations of color categories in infants may reflect color 
preferences instead. Second, and more seriously, other labs have reported 
failing to replicate the basic findings at all. In the current study we used 
eye-tracking to test 8-month-old infants' categorical perception of a previously 
attested color boundary (green-blue) and an additional color boundary 
(blue-purple). Our results show that infants are faster and more accurate at 
fixating targets when they come from a different color category than when from 
the same category (even though the chromatic separation sizes were equated). 
This is the case for both blue-green and blue-purple. Our findings provide 
independent evidence for the existence of color categories in pre-linguistic 
infants, and suggest that categorical perception of color can occur without 
color language.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12008
PMID: 23278932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


594. Dev Sci. 2013 Jan;16(1):24-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01189.x.

(Non)words, (non)words, (non)words: evidence for a protolexicon during the first 
year of life.

Ngon C(1), Martin A, Dupoux E, Cabrol D, Dutat M, Peperkamp S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et Psycholinguistique, (Département 
d'Etudes Cognitives - Ecole Normale Supérieure, Ecole des Hautes Etudes en 
Sciences Sociales, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique), Paris, France. 
celine.ngon@gmail.com

Previous research with artificial language learning paradigms has shown that 
infants are sensitive to statistical cues to word boundaries (Saffran, Aslin & 
Newport, 1996) and that they can use these cues to extract word-like units 
(Saffran, 2001). However, it is unknown whether infants use statistical 
information to construct a receptive lexicon when acquiring their native 
language. In order to investigate this issue, we rely on the fact that besides 
real words a statistical algorithm extracts sound sequences that are highly 
frequent in infant-directed speech but constitute nonwords. In three 
experiments, we use a preferential listening paradigm to test French-learning 
11-month-old infants' recognition of highly frequent disyllabic sequences from 
their native language. In Experiments 1 and 2, we use nonword stimuli and find 
that infants listen longer to high-frequency than to low-frequency sequences. In 
Experiment 3, we compare high-frequency nonwords to real words in the same 
frequency range, and find that infants show no preference. Thus, at 11 months, 
French-learning infants recognize highly frequent sound sequences from their 
native language and fail to differentiate between words and nonwords among these 
sequences. These results are evidence that they have used statistical 
information to extract word candidates from their input and stored them in a 
'protolexicon', containing both words and nonwords.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01189.x
PMID: 23278924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


595. Dev Sci. 2013 Jan;16(1):2-12. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01176.x. Epub 2012 
Oct 8.

The development of creative cognition across adolescence: distinct trajectories 
for insight and divergent thinking.

Kleibeuker SW(1), De Dreu CK, Crone EA.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Psychological Research, Leiden University, The Netherlands. 
kleibeukersw@fsw.leidenuniv.nl

We examined developmental trajectories of creative cognition across adolescence. 
Participants (N = 98), divided into four age groups (12/13 yrs, 15/16 yrs, 18/19 
yrs, and 25-30 yrs), were subjected to a battery of tasks gauging creative 
insight (visual; verbal) and divergent thinking (verbal; visuo-spatial). The two 
older age groups outperformed the two younger age groups on insight tasks. The 
25-30-year-olds outperformed the two youngest age groups on the originality 
measure of verbal divergent thinking. No age-group differences were observed for 
verbal divergent thinking fluency and flexibility. On divergent thinking in the 
visuo-spatial domain, however, only 15/16-year-olds outperformed 
12/13-year-olds; a model with peak performance for 15/16-years-old showed the 
best fit. The results for the different creativity processes are discussed in 
relation to cognitive and related neurobiological models. We conclude that 
mid-adolescence is a period of not only immaturities but also of creative 
potentials in the visuo-spatial domain, possibly related to developing control 
functions and explorative behavior.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01176.x
PMID: 23278922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


596. Dev Sci. 2012 Nov;15(6):783-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01169.x. Epub 2012 
Sep 7.

Go naked: diapers affect infant walking.

Cole WG(1), Lingeman JM, Adolph KE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, New York University, 6 Washington Place, New York, 
NY 10003, USA.

In light of cross-cultural and experimental research highlighting effects of 
childrearing practices on infant motor skill, we asked whether wearing diapers, 
a seemingly innocuous childrearing practice, affects infant walking. Diapers 
introduce bulk between the legs, potentially exacerbating infants' poor balance 
and wide stance. We show that walking is adversely affected by old-fashioned 
cloth diapers, and that even modern disposable diapers - habitually worn by most 
infants in the sample - incur a cost relative to walking naked. Infants 
displayed less mature gait patterns and more missteps and falls while wearing 
diapers. Thus, infants' own diapers constitute an ongoing biomechanical 
perturbation while learning to walk. Furthermore, shifts in diapering practices 
may have contributed to historical and cross-cultural differences in infant 
walking.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01169.x
PMCID: PMC3580949
PMID: 23106732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


597. Dev Sci. 2012 Nov;15(6):753-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01166.x.

Class matters: 12-month-olds' word-object associations privilege content over 
function words.

MacKenzie H(1), Curtin S, Graham SA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Calgary, Canada.

A fundamental step in learning words is the development of an association 
between a sound pattern and an element in the environment. Here we explore the 
nature of this associative ability in 12-month-olds, examining whether it is 
constrained to privilege particular word forms over others. Forty-eight infants 
were presented with sets of novel English content-like word-object pairings 
(e.g. fep) or novel English function-like word-object (e.g. iv) pairings until 
they habituated. Results indicated that infants associated novel content-like 
words, but not the novel function-like words, with novel objects. These results 
demonstrate that the mechanism with which basic word-object associations are 
formed is remarkably sophisticated by the onset of productive language. That is, 
mere associative pairings are not sufficient to form mappings. Rather the system 
requires well-formed noun-like words to co-occur with objects in order for the 
linkages to arise.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01166.x
PMID: 23106729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


598. Dev Sci. 2012 Sep;15(5):714-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01151.x. Epub 2012 
May 31.

Nine-months-old infants do not need to know what the agent prefers in order to 
reason about its goals: on the role of preference and persistence in infants' 
goal-attribution.

Hernik M(1), Southgate V.

Author information:
(1)Research Department of Educational, Clinical and Health Psychology, 
University College London, UK. m.hernik@ucl.ac.uk

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2012 Sep;15(5):723-4.
    Dev Sci. 2012 Sep;15(5):725-6.
    Dev Sci. 2012 Sep;15(5):727-8.

Human infants readily interpret others' actions as goal-directed and their 
understanding of previous goals shapes their expectations about an agent's 
future goal-directed behavior in a changed situation. According to a recent 
proposal (Luo & Baillargeon, 2005), infants' goal-attributions are not 
sufficient to support such expectations if the situational change involves 
broadening the set of choice-options available to the agent, and the agent's 
preferences among this broadened set are not known. The present study falsifies 
this claim by showing that 9-month-olds expect the agent to continue acting 
towards the previous goal even if additional choice-options become available for 
which there is no preference-related evidence. We conclude that infants do not 
need to know about the agent's preferences in order to form expectations about 
its goal-directed actions. Implications for the role of action persistency and 
action selectivity are discussed.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01151.x
PMCID: PMC3593001
PMID: 22925518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


599. Dev Sci. 2012 Sep;15(5):659-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01168.x. Epub 2012 
Jun 18.

Language input and acquisition in a Mayan village: how important is directed 
speech?

Shneidman LA(1), Goldin-Meadow S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA. 
lauras@uchicago.edu

Theories of language acquisition have highlighted the importance of adult 
speakers as active participants in children's language learning. However, in 
many communities children are reported to be directly engaged by their 
caregivers only rarely (Lieven, 1994). This observation raises the possibility 
that these children learn language from observing, rather than participating in, 
communicative exchanges. In this paper, we quantify naturally occurring language 
input in one community where directed interaction with children has been 
reported to be rare (Yucatec Mayan). We compare this input to the input heard by 
children growing up in large families in the United States, and we consider how 
directed and overheard input relate to Mayan children's later vocabulary. In 
Study 1, we demonstrate that 1-year-old Mayan children do indeed hear a smaller 
proportion of total input in directed speech than children from the US. In Study 
2, we show that for Mayan (but not US) children, there are great increases in 
the proportion of directed input that children receive between 13 and 35 months. 
In Study 3, we explore the validity of using videotaped data in a Mayan village. 
In Study 4, we demonstrate that word types directed to Mayan children from 
adults at 24 months (but not word types overheard by children or word types 
directed from other children) predict later vocabulary. These findings suggest 
that adult talk directed to children is important for early word learning, even 
in communities where much of children's early language input comes from 
overheard speech.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01168.x
PMCID: PMC3538130
PMID: 22925514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


600. Dev Sci. 2012 Sep;15(5):618-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01158.x. Epub 2012 
Jul 6.

Neural correlates of belief- and desire-reasoning in 7- and 8-year-old children: 
an event-related potential study.

Bowman LC(1), Liu D, Meltzoff AN, Wellman HM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, 1012 East Hall, 530 Church St., Ann Arbor, MI 
48109-1043, USA. lcbowman@umich.edu

Theory of mind requires belief- and desire-understanding. Event-related brain 
potential (ERP) research on belief- and desire-reasoning in adults found 
mid-frontal activations for both desires and beliefs, and selective 
right-posterior activations only for beliefs. Developmentally, children 
understand desires before beliefs; thus, a critical question concerns whether 
neural specialization for belief-reasoning exists in childhood or develops 
later. Neural activity was recorded as 7- and 8-year-olds (N = 18) performed the 
same diverse-desires, diverse-beliefs, and physical control tasks used in a 
previous adult ERP study. Like adults, mid-frontal scalp activations were found 
for belief- and desire-reasoning. Moreover, analyses using correct trials alone 
yielded selective right-posterior activations for belief-reasoning. Results 
suggest developmental links between increasingly accurate understanding of 
complex mental states and neural specialization supporting this understanding.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01158.x
PMCID: PMC3430978
PMID: 22925510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


601. Dev Sci. 2012 Sep;15(5):611-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01160.x. Epub 2012 
May 25.

Infant pointing serves an interrogative function.

Begus K(1), Southgate V.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Birkbeck, University of London, 
UK.

In recent years there has been a resurgence of interest in the motivations 
behind, and the function of, infant pointing behaviour. Many studies have 
converged on the view that early pointing reflects a motivation to share 
attention and interest with others. Under one view, it is the sharing of 
attention itself that is the ultimate function of pointing, and is an early 
manifestation of a uniquely human social cognition that is geared towards 
cooperation and collaboration. In the current study, we tested an alternative 
hypothesis in which the goal of pointing is not attention sharing itself, but 
the information-laden response that infants tend to receive as a result of 
sharing attention. If infants indeed point in order to obtain information, their 
pointing should be modulated by the perceived ability of the other to provide 
this information. In Experiment 1, 16-month-olds who interacted with a 
demonstrably knowledgeable experimenter pointed significantly more to novel 
objects than infants who interacted with an ignorant experimenter. In Experiment 
2, we confirmed that this finding was due to the perceived competence of the 
experimenter rather than to the different ways in which the experimenter 
responded to infants' points. Our results suggest that one function of pointing 
in infancy is to obtain information from others, and that infants selectively 
elicit desired information from those whom they perceive could competently 
provide it.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01160.x
PMID: 22925509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


602. Dev Sci. 2012 Jul;15(4):557-68. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01149.x. Epub 2012 
Apr 19.

Monkey lipsmacking develops like the human speech rhythm.

Morrill RJ(1), Paukner A, Ferrari PF, Ghazanfar AA.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540,USA.

Across all languages studied to date, audiovisual speech exhibits a consistent 
rhythmic structure. This rhythm is critical to speech perception. Some have 
suggested that the speech rhythm evolved de novo in humans. An alternative 
account--the one we explored here--is that the rhythm of speech evolved through 
the modification of rhythmic facial expressions. We tested this idea by 
investigating the structure and development of macaque monkey lipsmacks and 
found that their developmental trajectory is strikingly similar to the one that 
leads from human infant babbling to adult speech. Specifically, we show that: 
(1) younger monkeys produce slower, more variable mouth movements and as they 
get older, these movements become faster and less variable; and (2) this 
developmental pattern does not occur for another cyclical mouth 
movement--chewing. These patterns parallel human developmental patterns for 
speech and chewing. They suggest that, in both species, the two types of 
rhythmic mouth movements use different underlying neural circuits that develop 
in different ways. Ultimately, both lipsmacking and speech converge on a ~5 Hz 
rhythm that represents the frequency that characterizes the speech rhythm of 
human adults. We conclude that monkey lipsmacking and human speech share a 
homologous developmental mechanism, lending strong empirical support to the idea 
that the human speech rhythm evolved from the rhythmic facial expressions of our 
primate ancestors.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01149.x
PMCID: PMC3383808
PMID: 22709404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


603. Dev Sci. 2012 Jul;15(4):506-15. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01146.x. Epub 2012 
Apr 5.

Sleep-dependent consolidation of procedural motor memories in children and 
adults: the pre-sleep level of performance matters.

Wilhelm I(1), Metzkow-Mészàros M, Knapp S, Born J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroendocrinology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany. 
wilhelm@kfg.uni-luebeck.de

In striking contrast to adults, in children sleep following training a motor 
task did not induce the expected (offline) gain in motor skill performance in 
previous studies. Children normally perform at distinctly lower levels than 
adults. Moreover, evidence in adults suggests that sleep dependent offline gains 
in skill essentially depend on the pre-sleep level of performance. Against this 
background, we asked whether improving children's performance on a motor 
sequence learning task by extended training to levels approaching those of 
adults would enable sleep-associated gains in motor skill in this age group 
also. Children (4-6 years) and adults (18-35 years) performed on the motor 
sequence learning task (button-box task) before and after ~2-hour retention 
intervals including either sleep (midday nap) or wakefulness. Whereas one group 
of children and adults, respectively, received the standard amount of 10 blocks 
of training before retention intervals of sleep or wakefulness, a further group 
of children received an extended training on 30 blocks (distributed across 3 
days). A further group of adults received a restricted training on only two 
blocks before the retention intervals. Children after standard training reached 
lowest performance levels, whereas in adults performance after standard training 
was highest. Children with extended training and adults after reduced training 
reached intermediate performance levels. Only at these intermediate performance 
levels did sleep induce significant gains in motor sequence skill, whereas 
performance did not benefit from sleep in the low-performing children or in the 
high-performing adults. Spindle counts in the post-training nap were correlated 
with performance gains at retrieval only in the adults benefitting from sleep. 
We conclude that, across age groups, sleep induces the most robust gain in motor 
skill at an intermediate pre-sleep performance level. In low-performing children 
sleep-dependent improvements in skill may be revealed only after enhancing the 
pre-sleep performance level by extended training.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01146.x
PMID: 22709400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


604. Dev Sci. 2012 May;15(3):436-47. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01135.x. Epub 2012 
Feb 28.

Epistemic trust: modeling children's reasoning about others' knowledge and 
intent.

Shafto P(1), Eaves B, Navarro DJ, Perfors A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Louisville, KY 
40292, USA. p.shafto@louisville.edu

A core assumption of many theories of development is that children can learn 
indirectly from other people. However, indirect experience (or testimony) is not 
constrained to provide veridical information. As a result, if children are to 
capitalize on this source of knowledge, they must be able to infer who is 
trustworthy and who is not. How might a learner make such inferences while at 
the same time learning about the world? What biases, if any, might children 
bring to this problem? We address these questions with a computational model of 
epistemic trust in which learners reason about the helpfulness and 
knowledgeability of an informant. We show that the model captures the 
competencies shown by young children in four areas: (1) using informants' 
accuracy to infer how much to trust them; (2) using informants' recent accuracy 
to overcome effects of familiarity; (3) inferring trust based on consensus among 
informants; and (4) using information about mal-intent to decide not to trust. 
The model also explains developmental changes in performance between 3 and 4 
years of age as a result of changing default assumptions about the helpfulness 
of other people.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01135.x
PMID: 22490183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


605. Dev Sci. 2012 May;15(3):417-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01143.x. Epub 2012 
Mar 7.

Best friends: children use mutual gaze to identify friendships in others.

Nurmsoo E(1), Einav S, Hood BM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Bristol, UK. 
e.nurmsoo@kent.ac.uk

This study examined children's ability to use mutual eye gaze as a cue to 
friendships in others. In Experiment 1, following a discussion about friendship, 
4-, 5-, and 6-year-olds were shown animations in which three cartoon children 
looked at one another, and were told that one target character had a best 
friend. Although all age groups accurately detected the mutual gaze between the 
target and another character, only 5- and 6-year-olds used this cue to infer 
friendship. Experiment 2 replicated the effect with 5- and 6-year-olds when the 
target character was not explicitly identified. Finally, in Experiment 3, where 
the attribution of friendship could only be based on synchronized mutual gaze, 
6-year-olds made this attribution, while 4- and 5-year-olds did not. Children 
occasionally referred to mutual eye gaze when asked to justify their responses 
in Experiments 2 and 3, but it was only by the age of 6 that reference to these 
cues correlated with the use of mutual gaze in judgements of affiliation. 
Although younger children detected mutual gaze, it was not until 6 years of age 
that children reliably detected and justified mutual gaze as a cue to 
friendship.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01143.x
PMID: 22490181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


606. Dev Sci. 2012 May;15(3):320-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01129.x. Epub 2011 
Dec 7.

The growth of reading skills in children with Down Syndrome.

Hulme C(1), Goetz K, Brigstocke S, Nash HM, Lervåg A, Snowling MJ.

Author information:
(1)University College London, Division of Psychology and Language Sciences, 
Chandler House (Rm 210), 2 Wakefield Street, London WC1N 1PF, UK. 
c.hulme@ucl.ac.uk

There appears to be a close and probably causal relationship between early 
variations in phoneme skills and later reading skills in typically developing 
children, though the pattern in children with Down Syndrome is less clear. We 
present the results of a 2-year longitudinal study of 49 children with Down 
Syndrome (DS) and 61 typically developing (TD) control children with similar 
initial levels of reading skill. Phoneme awareness and vocabulary were strong 
concurrent predictors of initial levels of reading skill in both groups. 
However, longitudinally phoneme awareness was a predictor of the growth of 
reading skills in TD children but not in children with DS. There was a very high 
degree of longitudinal stability in reading skills in children with DS, and 
initial levels of reading skills seemed to be highly constrained by general 
language skills, as indexed by vocabulary knowledge, in this population. We 
conclude that reading development in children with DS shows similarities and 
differences to the pattern observed in TD children and that phoneme awareness 
appears to be a less powerful influence on the development of reading skills in 
children with DS.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01129.x
PMID: 22490173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


607. Dev Sci. 2012 Mar;15(2):272-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01124.x. Epub 2011 
Dec 3.

Dopamine receptor D4 gene variation predicts preschoolers' developing theory of 
mind.

Lackner C(1), Sabbagh MA, Hallinan E, Liu X, Holden JJ.

Author information:
(1)Psychology Department, Queen's University, Kingston, Canada.

Individual differences in preschoolers' understanding that human action is 
caused by internal mental states, or representational theory of mind (RTM), are 
heritable, as are developmental disorders such as autism in which RTM is 
particularly impaired. We investigated whether polymorphisms of genes affecting 
dopamine (DA) utilization and metabolism constitute part of the molecular basis 
of this heritability. Seventy-three 42- to 54-month-olds were given a battery of 
RTM tasks along with other task batteries that measured executive functioning 
and representational understanding more generally. Polymorphisms of the dopamine 
D4 receptor gene (DRD4) were associated with RTM performance such that 
preschoolers with shorter alleles outperformed those with one or more longer 
alleles. However, polymorphisms of the catechol-O-methyl transferase gene (COMT) 
and the dopamine transporter gene (DAT1) genes were not associated with 
children's RTM performance. Further tests showed that the association between 
DRD4 allele length and RTM performance was not attributable to a common 
association with executive functioning or representational understanding more 
generally. We conclude that DRD4 receptors, likely via their effects on frontal 
lobe development and functioning, may represent a neuromaturational constraint 
governing the stereotypical and universal trajectory of RTM development.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01124.x
PMID: 22356182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


608. Dev Sci. 2012 Mar;15(2):250-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01121.x. Epub 2011 
Nov 24.

Early childhood cognitive development and parental cognitive stimulation: 
evidence for reciprocal gene-environment transactions.

Tucker-Drob EM(1), Harden KP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology & Population Research Center, University of Texas at 
Austin, USA. tuckerdrob@psy.utexas.edu

Parenting is traditionally conceptualized as an exogenous environment that 
affects child development. However, children can also influence the quality of 
parenting that they receive. Using longitudinal data from 650 identical and 
fraternal twin pairs, we found that, controlling for cognitive ability at age 2 
years, cognitive stimulation by parents (coded from video recorded behaviors 
during a dyadic task) at 2 years predicted subsequent reading ability at age 4 
years. Moreover, controlling for cognitive stimulation at 2 years, children's 
cognitive ability at 2 years predicted the quality of stimulation received from 
their parents at 4 years. Genetic and environmental factors differentially 
contributed to these effects. Parenting influenced subsequent cognitive 
development through a family-level environmental pathway, whereas children's 
cognitive ability influenced subsequent parenting through a genetic pathway. 
These results suggest that genetic influences on cognitive development occur 
through a transactional process, in which genetic predispositions lead children 
to evoke cognitively stimulating experiences from their environments.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01121.x
PMCID: PMC3296290
PMID: 22356180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


609. Dev Sci. 2012 Mar;15(2):194-203. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01116.x. Epub 
2011 Nov 2.

Effects of normal and abnormal visual experience on the development of opposing 
aftereffects for upright and inverted faces.

Robbins RA(1), Maurer D, Hatry A, Anzures G, Mondloch CJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Neuroscience & Behaviour, McMaster University, 
Canada. dr.r.robbins@gmail.com

We used opposing figural aftereffects to investigate whether there are at least 
partially separable representations of upright and inverted faces in patients 
who missed early visual experience because of bilateral congenital cataracts 
(mean age at test 19.5 years). Visually normal adults and 10-year-olds were 
tested for comparison. Adults showed the expected opposing aftereffects for 
upright and inverted faces. Ten-year-olds showed an adultlike aftereffect for 
upright faces but, unlike the adult group, no aftereffect for inverted faces. 
Patients failed to show an aftereffect for either upright or inverted faces. 
Overall, the results suggest that early visual input is necessary for the later 
development of (at least partially) separable representations of upright and 
inverted faces, a developmental process that takes many years to reach an 
adult-like refinement.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01116.x
PMID: 22356175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


610. Dev Sci. 2012 Jan;15(1):139-49. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01102.x. Epub 2011 
Nov 9.

Reading acquisition enhances an early visual process of contour integration.

Szwed M(1), Ventura P, Querido L, Cohen L, Dehaene S.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U992, Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit, IFR 49, Gif sur Yvette, France. 
mfszwed@gmail.com

The acquisition of reading has an extensive impact on the developing brain and 
leads to enhanced abilities in phonological processing and visual letter 
perception. Could this expertise also extend to early visual abilities outside 
the reading domain? Here we studied the performance of illiterate, ex-illiterate 
and literate adults closely matched in age, socioeconomic and cultural 
characteristics, on a contour integration task known to depend on early visual 
processing. Stimuli consisted of a closed egg-shaped contour made of 
disconnected Gabor patches, within a background of randomly oriented Gabor 
stimuli. Subjects had to decide whether the egg was pointing left or right. 
Difficulty was varied by jittering the orientation of the Gabor patches forming 
the contour. Contour integration performance was lower in illiterates than in 
both ex-illiterate and literate controls. We argue that this difference in 
contour perception must reflect a genuine difference in visual function. 
According to this view, the intensive perceptual training that accompanies 
reading acquisition also improves early visual abilities, suggesting that the 
impact of literacy on the visual system is more widespread than originally 
proposed.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01102.x
PMID: 22251300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


611. Dev Sci. 2012 Jan;15(1):54-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01107.x. Epub 2011 
Nov 2.

Collaborative partner or social tool? New evidence for young children's 
understanding of joint intentions in collaborative activities.

Warneken F(1), Gräfenhain M, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. 
warneken@wjh.harvard.edu

Some children's social activities are structured by joint goals. In previous 
research, the criterion used to determine this was relatively weak: if the 
partner stopped interacting, did the child attempt to re-engage her? But 
re-engagement attempts could easily result from the child simply realizing that 
she needs the partner to reach her own goal in the activity (social tool 
explanation). In two experiments, 21- and 27-month-old children interacted with 
an adult in games in which they either did or did not physically need the 
partner to reach a concrete goal. Moreover, when the partner stopped 
interacting, she did so because she was either unwilling to continue (breaking 
off from the joint goal) or unable to continue (presumably still maintaining the 
joint goal). Children of both age groups encouraged the recalcitrant partner 
equally often whether she was or was not physically needed for goal attainment. 
In addition, they did so more often when the partner was unable to continue than 
when she was unwilling to continue. These findings suggest that young children 
do not just view their collaborative partners as mindless social tools, but 
rather as intentional, cooperative agents with whom they must coordinate 
intentional states.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01107.x
PMID: 22251292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


612. Dev Sci. 2012 Jan;15(1):35-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01095.x. Epub 2011 
Sep 29.

Action production influences 12-month-old infants' attention to others' actions.

Cannon EN(1), Woodward AL, Gredebäck G, von Hofsten C, Turek C.

Author information:
(1)Human Development Department, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, 
USA. ecannon@umd.edu

Recent work implicates a link between action control systems and action 
understanding. In this study, we investigated the role of the motor system in 
the development of visual anticipation of others' actions. Twelve-month-olds 
engaged in behavioral and observation tasks. Containment activity, infants' 
spontaneous engagement in producing containment actions; and gaze latency, how 
quickly they shifted gaze to the goal object of another's containment actions, 
were measured. Findings revealed a positive relationship: infants who received 
the behavior task first evidenced a strong correlation between their own actions 
and their subsequent gaze latency of another's actions. Learning over the course 
of trials was not evident. These findings demonstrate a direct influence of the 
motor system on online visual attention to others' actions early in development.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01095.x
PMCID: PMC3261504
PMID: 22251290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


613. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):440-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00996.x.

Carryover effect of joint attention to repeated events in chimpanzees and young 
children.

Okamoto-Barth S(1), Moore C, Barth J, Subiaul F, Povinelli DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Economics, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands. 
s.barth@maastrichtuniversity.nl

Gaze following is a fundamental component of triadic social interaction which 
includes events and an object shared with other individuals and is found in both 
human and nonhuman primates. Most previous work has focused only on the 
immediate reaction after following another’s gaze. In contrast, this study 
investigated whether gaze following is retained after the observation of the 
other’s gaze shift, whether this retainment differs between species and age 
groups, and whether the retainment depends on the nature of the preceding 
events. In the social condition, subjects (1- and 2-year-old human children and 
chimpanzees) witnessed an experimenter who looked and pointed in the direction 
of a target lamp. In the physical condition, the target lamp blinked but the 
experimenter did not provide any cues. After a brief delay, we presented the 
same stimulus again without any cues. All subjects looked again to the target 
location after experiencing the social condition and thus showed a carryover 
effect. However, only 2-year-olds showed a carryover effect in the physical 
condition; 1-year-olds and chimpanzees did not. Additionally, only human 
children showed spontaneous interactive actions such as pointing. Our results 
suggest that the difference between the two age groups and chimpanzees is 
conceptual and not only quantitative.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00996.x
PMID: 22213912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


614. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):395-401. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00989.x.

The acquisition of phonetic categories in bilingual infants: new data from an 
anticipatory eye movement paradigm.

Albareda-Castellot B(1), Pons F, Sebastián-Gallés N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Psychology, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. 
barbara.albareda@gmail.com

Contrasting results have been reported regarding the phonetic acquisition of 
bilinguals. A lack of discrimination has been observed for certain native 
contrasts in 8-month-old Catalan-Spanish bilingual infants (Bosch & 
Sebastián-Gallés, 2003a), though not in French-English bilingual infants (Burns, 
Yoshida, Hill & Werker, 2007; Sundara, Polka & Molnar, 2008). At present, the 
data for Catalan-Spanish bilinguals constitute an exception in the early 
language acquisition literature. This study contributes new findings that show 
that Catalan-Spanish bilingual infants do not lose the capacity to discriminate 
native contrasts. We used an adaptation of the anticipatory eye movement 
paradigm (AEM; McMurray & Aslin, 2004) to explore this question. In two 
experiments we tested the ability of infants from Catalan and Spanish 
monolingual families and from Catalan-Spanish bilingual families to discriminate 
a Spanish-Catalan common and a Catalan-specific vowel contrast. Results from 
both experiments revealed that Catalan-Spanish bilingual infants showed the same 
discrimination abilities as those shown by their monolingual peers, even in a 
phonetic contrast that had not been discriminated in previous studies. Our 
results demonstrate that discrimination can be observed in 8-month-old bilingual 
infants when tested with a measure not based on recovery of attention. The high 
ratio of cognates in Spanish and Catalan may underlie the reason why bilinguals 
failed to discriminate the native vowels when tested with the 
familiarization-preference procedure but succeeded with the AEM paradigm.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00989.x
PMID: 22213908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


615. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):292-305. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00980.x.

False-belief understanding i 2.5-year-olds: evidence for 
violation-of-expectation change-of-location and unexpected-contents tasks.

He Z(1), Bolz M, Baillargeon R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Illinois, Champaign, IL 61820, USA. 
zhe3@illinois.edu

Until recently, it was generally assumed that the ability to attribute false 
beliefs did not emerge until about 4 years of age. However, recent reports using 
spontaneous- as opposed to elicited-response tasks have suggested that this 
ability may be present much earlier. To date, researchers have employed two 
kinds of spontaneous-response false-belief tasks: violation-of-expectation tasks 
have been used with infants in the second year of life, and anticipatory-looking 
tasks have been used with toddlers in the third year of life. In the present 
research, 2.5-year-old toddlers were tested in violation-of-expectation tasks 
involving a change-of-location situation (Experiment 1) and an 
unexpected-contents situation (Experiment 2). Results were positive in both 
situations, providing the first demonstrations of false-belief understanding in 
toddlers using violation-of-expectation tasks and, as such, pointing to a 
consistent and continuous picture of early false-belief understanding.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00980.x
PMCID: PMC3357329
PMID: 22213902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


616. Dev Sci. 2011 Nov;14(6):1445-58. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01089.x. Epub 
2011 Sep 17.

Consonants and vowels: different roles in early language acquisition.

Hochmann JR(1), Benavides-Varela S, Nespor M, Mehler J.

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neuroscience Department, SISSA, International School for Advanced 
Studies, Trieste, Italy. jr.hochmann@gmail.com

Language acquisition involves both acquiring a set of words (i.e. the lexicon) 
and learning the rules that combine them to form sentences (i.e. syntax). Here, 
we show that consonants are mainly involved in word processing, whereas vowels 
are favored for extracting and generalizing structural relations. We demonstrate 
that such a division of labor between consonants and vowels plays a role in 
language acquisition. In two very similar experimental paradigms, we show that 
12-month-old infants rely more on the consonantal tier when identifying words 
(Experiment 1), but are better at extracting and generalizing repetition-based 
srtuctures over the vocalic tier (Experiment 2). These results indicate that 
infants are able to exploit the functional differences between consonants and 
vowels at an age when they start acquiring the lexicon, and suggest that basic 
speech categories are assigned to different learning mechanisms that sustain 
early language acquisition.

2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01089.x
PMID: 22010902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


617. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1194-204; discussion 1205-6. doi: 
10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01070.x. Epub 2011 Jul 28.

The powers of noise-fitting: reply to Barth and Paladino.

Opfer JE(1), Siegler RS, Young CJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. 
opfer.7@osu.edu

Comment on
    Dev Sci. 2011 Jan;14(1):125-35.

Barth and Paladino (2011) argue that changes in numerical representations are 
better modeled by a power function whose exponent gradually rises to 1 than as a 
shift from a logarithmic to a linear representation of numerical magnitude. 
However, the fit of the power function to number line estimation data may simply 
stem from fitting noise generated by averaging over changing proportions of 
logarithmic and linear estimation patterns. To evaluate this possibility, we 
used conventional model fitting techniques with individual as well as group 
average data; simulations that varied the proportion of data generated by 
different functions; comparisons of alternative models' prediction of new data; 
and microgenetic analyses of rates of change in experiments on children's 
learning. Both new data and individual participants' data were predicted less 
accurately by power functions than by logarithmic and linear functions. In 
microgenetic studies, changes in the best fitting power function's exponent 
occurred abruptly, a finding inconsistent with Barth and Paladino's 
interpretation that development of numerical representations reflects a gradual 
shift in the shape of the power function. Overall, the data support the view 
that change in this area entails transitions from logarithmic to linear 
representations of numerical magnitude.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01070.x
PMID: 21884334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


618. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1185-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01064.x. Epub 
2011 Jul 21.

Changing patterns of neuropsychological functioning in children living at high 
altitude above and below 4000 m: a report from the Bolivian Children Living at 
Altitude (BoCLA) study.

Virués-Ortega J(1), Bucks R, Kirkham FJ, Baldeweg T, Baya-Botti A, Hogan AM; 
Bolivian Children Living at Altitude project (BoCLA 06).

Author information:
(1)University of Manitoba & St.Amant Research Centre, Winnipeg, Canada. 
javier_virues@umanitoba.ca

The brain is highly sensitive to environmental hypoxia. Little is known, 
however, about the neuropsychological effects of high altitude residence in the 
developing brain. We recently described only minor changes in processing speed 
in native Bolivian children and adolescents living at approximately 3700 m. 
However, evidence for loss of cerebral autoregulation above this altitude (4000 
m) suggests a potential threshold of hypoxia severity over which 
neuropsychological functioning may be compromised. We conducted physiological 
and neuropsychological assessments in 62 Bolivian children and adolescents 
living at La Paz (∼3700 m) and El Alto (∼4100 m) in order to address this issue. 
Groups were equivalent in terms of age, gender, social class, schooling, 
parental education and genetic admixture. Apart from percentage of hemoglobin 
saturated with oxygen in arterial blood (%SpO(2)), participants did not differ 
in their basal cardiac and cerebrovascular performance as explored by heart 
rate, mean arterial pressure, end-tidal carbon dioxide, and cerebral blood flow 
velocity at the basilar, anterior, middle and posterior cerebral arteries. A 
comprehensive neuropsychological assessment was administered, including tests of 
executive functions, attention, memory and psychomotor performance. Participants 
living at extreme altitude showed lower levels of performance in all executive 
tests (Cohen effect size = -0.91), whereas all other domains remained unaffected 
by altitude of residence. These results are compatible with earlier 
physiological evidence of a transitional zone for cerebral autoregulation at an 
altitude of 4000 m. We now show that above this threshold, the developing brain 
is apparently increasingly vulnerable to neuropsychological deficit.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01064.x
PMID: 21884333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


619. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1150-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01066.x. Epub 
2011 Jul 26.

Micro-analysis of infant looking in a naturalistic social setting: insights from 
biologically based models of attention.

de Barbaro K(1), Chiba A, Deák GO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Science, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, CA 92093-0515, USA.

A current theory of attention posits that several micro-indices of attentional 
vigilance are dependent on activation of the locus coeruleus, a brainstem 
nucleus that regulates cortical norepinephrine activity (Aston-Jones et al., 
1999). This theory may account for many findings in the infant literature, while 
highlighting important new areas for research and theory on infant attention. We 
examined the visual behaviors of n = 16 infants (6-7 months) while they attended 
to multiple spatially distributed targets in a naturalistic environment. We 
coded four measures of attentional vigilance, adapted from studies of 
norepinergic modulation of animal attention: rate of fixations, duration of 
fixations, latency to reorientation, and target 'hits'. These measures showed a 
high degree of coherence in individual infants, in parallel with findings from 
animal studies. Results also suggest that less vigilant infants showed greater 
habituation to the trial structure and more attentiveness to less salient 
stimuli during periods of high attentional competition. This pattern of results 
is predicted by the Aston-Jones model of attention, but could not be explained 
by the standard information processing model.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01066.x
PMID: 21884330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


620. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1107-18. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01057.x. Epub 
2011 Jun 7.

Age-related differences in brain electrical activity during extended continuous 
face recognition in younger children, older children and adults.

Van Strien JW(1), Glimmerveen JC, Franken IH, Martens VE, de Bruin EA.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychology, Faculty of Social Sciences, Erasmus University 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. vanstrien@fsw.eur.nl

To examine the development of recognition memory in primary-school children, 36 
healthy younger children (8-9 years old) and 36 healthy older children (11-12 
years old) participated in an ERP study with an extended continuous face 
recognition task (Study 1). Each face of a series of 30 faces was shown randomly 
six times interspersed with distracter faces. The children were required to make 
old vs. new decisions. Older children responded faster than younger children, 
but younger children exhibited a steeper decrease in latencies across the five 
repetitions. Older children exhibited better accuracy for new faces, but there 
were no age differences in recognition accuracy for repeated faces. For the N2, 
N400 and late positive complex (LPC), we analyzed the old/new effects 
(repetition 1 vs. new presentation) and the extended repetition effects 
(repetitions 1 through 5). Compared to older children, younger children 
exhibited larger frontocentral N2 and N400 old/new effects. For extended face 
repetitions, negativity of the N2 and N400 decreased in a linear fashion in both 
age groups. For the LPC, an ERP component thought to reflect recollection, no 
significant old/new or extended repetition effects were found. Employing the 
same face recognition paradigm in 20 adults (Study 2), we found a significant 
N400 old/new effect at lateral frontal sites and a significant LPC repetition 
effect at parietal sites, with LPC amplitudes increasing linearly with the 
number of repetitions. This study clearly demonstrates differential 
developmental courses for the N400 and LPC pertaining to recognition memory for 
faces. It is concluded that face recognition in children is mediated by early 
and probably more automatic than conscious recognition processes. In adults, the 
LPC extended repetition effect indicates that adult face recognition memory is 
related to a conscious and graded recollection process rather than to an 
automatic recognition process.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01057.x
PMID: 21884326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


621. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1100-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01056.x. Epub 2011 
Jun 7.

On-line statistical segmentation of a non-speech auditory stream in neonates as 
demonstrated by event-related brain potentials.

Kudo N(1), Nonaka Y, Mizuno N, Mizuno K, Okanoya K.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Biolinguistics, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Japan.

The ability to statistically segment a continuous auditory stream is one of the 
most important preparations for initiating language learning. Such ability is 
available to human infants at 8 months of age, as shown by a behavioral 
measurement. However, behavioral study alone cannot determine how early this 
ability is available. A recent study using measurements of event-related 
potential (ERP) revealed that neonates are able to detect statistical boundaries 
within auditory streams of speech syllables. Extending this line of research 
will allow us to better understand the cognitive preparation for language 
acquisition that is available to neonates. The aim of the present study was to 
examine the domain-generality of such statistical segmentation. Neonates were 
presented with nonlinguistic tone sequences composed of four tritone units, each 
consisting of three semitones extracted from one octave, for two 5-minute 
sessions. Only the first tone of each unit evoked a significant positivity in 
the frontal area during the second session, but not in the first session. This 
result suggests that the general ability to distinguish units in an auditory 
stream by statistical information is activated at birth and is probably innately 
prepared in humans.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01056.x
PMID: 21884325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


622. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1089-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01059.x. Epub 
2011 Jun 18.

Susceptibility to the flash-beep illusion is increased in children compared to 
adults.

Innes-Brown H(1), Barutchu A, Shivdasani MN, Crewther DP, Grayden DB, Paolini 
AG.

Author information:
(1)The Bionic Ear Institute, Melbourne, Australia. hinnes-brown@bionicear.org

Erratum in
    Dev Sci. 2012 Jan;15(1):164. Paolini, Antonio [corrected to Paolini, Antonio 
G].

Audio-visual integration was studied in children aged 8-17 (N = 30) and adults 
(N = 22) using the 'flash-beep illusion' paradigm, where the presentation of two 
beeps causes a single flash to be perceived as two flashes (fission illusion), 
and a single beep causes two flashes to be perceived as one flash (fusion 
illusion). Children reported significantly more fission illusions than adults, 
indicating that auditory and visual information was integrated more often, and 
less selectively, than in adults. Within either group, illusion reports did not 
correlate with either age or motor coordination measures. The current results 
show that the form of multisensory integration indexed by the illusion is slow 
to mature in normally developing children.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01059.x
PMID: 21884324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


623. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1033-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01051.x. Epub 
2011 Jun 4.

The contribution of visual and vestibular information to spatial orientation by 
6- to 14-month-old infants and adults.

Bremner JG(1), Hatton F, Foster KA, Mason U.

Author information:
(1)Psychology Department, Lancaster University, UK. j.g.bremner@lancaster.ac.uk

Although there is much research on infants' ability to orient in space, little 
is known regarding the information they use to do so. This research uses a 
rotating room to evaluate the relative contribution of visual and vestibular 
information to location of a target following bodily rotation. Adults responded 
precisely on the basis of visual flow information. Seven-month-olds responded 
mostly on the basis of visual flow, whereas 9-month-olds responded mostly on the 
basis of vestibular information, and 12-month-olds responded mostly on the basis 
of visual information. Unlike adults, infants of all ages showed partial 
influence by both modalities. Additionally, 7-month-olds were capable of using 
vestibular information when there was no visual information for movement or 
stability, and 9-month-olds still relied on vestibular information when visual 
information was enhanced. These results are discussed in the context of 
neuroscientific evidence regarding visual-vestibular interaction, and in 
relation to possible changes in reliance on visual and vestibular information 
following acquisition of locomotion.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01051.x
PMID: 21884319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


624. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):972-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01046.x. Epub 2011 
Jun 4.

Infants avoid 'labouring in vain' by attending more to learnable than 
unlearnable linguistic patterns.

Gerken L(1), Balcomb FK, Minton JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721-0068, USA. 
gerken@u.arizona.edu

Every environment contains infinite potential features and correlations among 
features, or patterns. Detecting valid and learnable patterns in one environment 
is beneficial for learners because doing so lends predictability to new 
environments where the same or analogous patterns recur. However, some apparent 
correlations among features reflect spurious patterns, and attempting to learn 
the latter costs time and resources with no advantage to the learner. Thus, an 
efficient learner in a complex environment needs to devote more attention to 
input that reflects a real and learnable pattern than to input that reflects a 
spurious or ultimately unlearnable pattern. However, in order to achieve such 
efficiency in the absence of external feedback, learners need to have an 
implicit metric of their own learning progress. Do human infants have such a 
metric? Data from two experiments demonstrate that 17-month-olds attend longer 
to learnable vs. unlearnable linguistic grammars, taking more trials to 
habituate and more overall time to habituate for grammars in which a valid 
generalization over input stimuli can be made. These data provide the first 
evidence that infants have an implicit metric of their own learning progress and 
preferentially direct their attention to learnable aspects of their environment.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01046.x
PMID: 21884313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


625. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):935-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01031.x. Epub 2011 
May 5.

Maturation of EEG power spectra in early adolescence: a longitudinal study.

Cragg L(1), Kovacevic N, McIntosh AR, Poulsen C, Martinu K, Leonard G, Paus T.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Nottingham, UK. 
lucy.cragg@nottingham.ac.uk

This study investigated the fine-grained development of the EEG power spectra in 
early adolescence, and the extent to which it is reflected in changes in peak 
frequency. It also sought to determine whether sex differences in the EEG power 
spectra reflect differential patterns of maturation. A group of 56 adolescents 
were tested at age 10 years and then at two further time-points approximately 18 
months apart. The EEG was recorded during both eyes-closed and eyes-open 
conditions and Fourier transformed to provide estimates of absolute and relative 
spectral power at 0.5 Hz intervals from 0.5 to 40 Hz. The peak alpha frequency 
for each individual at each time-point was also determined for relative spectral 
power. Partial Least Squares (PLS) analysis was used to determine the 
combination of electrodes and frequencies that showed developmental change, or 
differed between the sexes. As a function of age, absolute delta and theta 
frequencies power decreased, and relative alpha2 and beta frequencies increased, 
replicating the standard findings of a decrease in lower, and increase in 
higher, frequencies with age. A small but significant increase in peak alpha 
frequency with age was detected. Moreover PLS analysis performed with individual 
alpha frequencies aligned to 10 Hz suggested that the age-related increase seen 
in alpha2 relative power was driven by changes in the peak frequency. Although 
males demonstrated higher alpha power than females, there were no sex 
differences in peak frequency, suggesting that there may be more to sex 
differences in EEG power than simply different rates of maturation between the 
two sexes.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01031.x
PMID: 21884309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


626. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):911-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01041.x. Epub 2011 
Mar 23.

Controlling attention to gaze and arrows in childhood: an fMRI study of typical 
development and Autism Spectrum Disorders.

Vaidya CJ(1), Foss-Feig J, Shook D, Kaplan L, Kenworthy L, Gaillard WD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Georgetown University, USA. cjv2@georgetown.edu

Functional magnetic resonance imaging was used to examine functional anatomy of 
attention to social (eye gaze) and nonsocial (arrow) communicative stimuli in 
late childhood and in a disorder defined by atypical processing of social 
stimuli, Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD). Children responded to a target word 
('LEFT'/'RIGHT') in the context of a distracting arrow or averted gaze pointing 
in a direction that was congruent, incongruent, or neutral (bar without 
arrowheads, central gaze) relative to the target word. Despite being irrelevant 
to the target task, both arrow and averted gaze facilitated responses (Congruent 
vs. Neutral trials) to the same extent in the two groups and led to interference 
(Incongruent vs. Congruent trials), which was greater from arrows in ASD than 
control children. In the brain, interaction between group and distracter-domain 
was observed in frontal-temporal regions during facilitation and 
frontal-striatal regions during interference. During facilitation, regions 
associated with attention to gaze in control children (left superior temporal 
sulcus, premotor) were associated with attention to arrows in ASD children; gaze 
was associated with medial temporal involvement in ASD children. During 
interference, regions associated with arrows in control children (anterior 
cingulate, right caudate) were activated in response to gaze in ASD children; 
further, left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, a region not observed in control 
children, was activated during gaze-interference in ASD children. Thus, 
functional anatomy was atypical in ASD children during spontaneous processing of 
social and nonsocial communicative cues.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01041.x
PMID: 21676110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


627. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):901-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01040.x. Epub 2011 
Apr 4.

Bridging the gap between the other and me: the functional role of motor 
resonance and action effects in infants' imitation.

Paulus M(1), Hunnius S, Vissers M, Bekkering H.

Author information:
(1)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. m.paulus@donders.ru.nl

This paper investigates a two-stage model of infants' imitative learning from 
observed actions and their effects. According to this model, the observation of 
another person's action activates the corresponding motor code in the infants' 
motor repertoire (i.e. leads to motor resonance). The second process guiding 
imitative behavior results from the observed action effects. If the modeled 
action is followed by a salient action effect, the representation of this effect 
(i.e. perceptual code) will be associated with the activated motor code. If the 
infant later aims to obtain the same effect, the corresponding motor program 
will be activated and the model's action will therefore be imitated. 
Accordingly, the model assumes that for the imitation of novel actions the 
modeled action needs to elicit sufficient motor resonance and must be followed 
by a salient action effect. Using the head touch imitation paradigm, we tested 
these two assumptions derived from the model. To this end, we manipulated 
whether the actions demonstrated to the infants were or were not in the motor 
repertoire, i.e. elicited stronger or less strong motor resonance, and whether 
they were followed by salient action effects or not. The results were in line 
with the proposed two-stage model of infants' imitative learning and suggest 
that motor resonance is necessary, but not sufficient for infants' imitative 
learning from others' actions and their effects.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01040.x
PMID: 21676109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


628. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):892-900. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01039.x. Epub 
2011 Apr 4.

Shape, color and the other-race effect in the infant brain.

Balas B(1), Westerlund A, Hung K, Nelson Iii CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, USA. bjbalas@gmail.com

The 'other-race' effect describes the phenomenon in which faces are difficult to 
distinguish from one another if they belong to an ethnic or racial group to 
which the observer has had little exposure. Adult observers typically display 
multiple forms of recognition error for other-race faces, and infants exhibit 
behavioral evidence of a developing other-race effect at about 9 months of age. 
The neural correlates of the adult other-race effect have been identified using 
ERPs and fMRI, but the effects of racial category on infants' neural response to 
face stimuli have to date not been described. We examine two distinct components 
of the infant ERP response to human faces and demonstrate through the use of 
computer-generated 'hybrid' faces that the observed other-race effect is not the 
result of low-level sensitivity to 3D shape and color differences between the 
stimuli. Rather, differential processing depends critically on the joint 
encoding of race-specific features.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01039.x
PMCID: PMC4422220
PMID: 21676108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


629. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):809-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01029.x. Epub 2011 
Mar 24.

Kindergarten children's sensitivity to geometry in maps.

Spelke ES(1), Gilmore CK, McCarthy S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Harvard University, USA. spelke@wjh.harvard.edu

Geometrical concepts are critical to a host of human cognitive achievements, 
from maps to measurement to mathematics, and both the development of these 
concepts, and their variation by gender, have long been studied. Most studies of 
geometrical reasoning, however, present children with materials containing both 
geometric and non-geometric information, and with tasks that are open to 
multiple solution strategies. Here we present kindergarten children with a task 
requiring a focus on geometry: navigation in a small-scale space by a purely 
geometric map. Children spontaneously extracted and used relationships of both 
distance and angle in the maps, without prior demonstration, instruction, or 
feedback, but they failed to use the sense information that distinguishes an 
array from its mirror image. Children of both genders showed a common profile of 
performance, with boys showing no advantage on this task. These findings provide 
evidence that some map-reading abilities arise prior to formal instruction, are 
common to both genders, and are used spontaneously to guide children's spatial 
behavior.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01029.x
PMCID: PMC3117203
PMID: 21676100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


630. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):762-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01023.x. Epub 2010 
Dec 16.

Exploring the perceptual spaces of faces, cars and birds in children and adults.

Tanaka JW(1), Meixner TL, Kantner J.

Author information:
(1)Cognition and Brain Sciences Program, Department of Psychology, University of 
Victoria, Canada. jtanaka@uvic.ca

While much developmental research has focused on the strategies that children 
employ to recognize faces, less is known about the principles governing the 
organization of face exemplars in perceptual memory. In this study, we tested a 
novel, child-friendly paradigm for investigating the organization of face, bird 
and car exemplars. Children ages 3-4, 5-6, 7-8, 9-10, 11-12 and adults were 
presented with 50/50 morphs of typical and atypical face, bird and car parent 
images. Participants were asked to judge whether the 50/50 morph more strongly 
resembled the typical or the atypical parent image. Young and older children and 
adults showed a systematic bias to the atypical faces and birds, but no bias 
toward the atypical cars. Collectively, these findings argue that by the age of 
3, children encode and organize faces, birds and cars in a perceptual space that 
is strikingly similar to that of adults. Category organization for both children 
and adults follows Krumhansl's (1978) distance-density principle in which the 
similarity between two exemplars is jointly determined by their physical 
appearance and the density of neighboring exemplars in the perceptual space.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01023.x
PMCID: PMC3117253
PMID: 21676096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


631. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):693-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01015.x. Epub 2010 
Dec 5.

The development of a phonological illusion: a cross-linguistic study with 
Japanese and French infants.

Mazuka R(1), Cao Y, Dupoux E, Christophe A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Language Development, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Wako-shi, 
Japan. mazuka@brain.riken.jp

In adults, native language phonology has strong perceptual effects. Previous 
work has shown that Japanese speakers, unlike French speakers, break up illegal 
sequences of consonants with illusory vowels: they report hearing abna as abuna. 
To study the development of phonological grammar, we compared Japanese and 
French infants in a discrimination task. In Experiment 1, we observed that 
14-month-old Japanese infants, in contrast to French infants, failed to 
discriminate phonetically varied sets of abna-type and abuna-type stimuli. In 
Experiment 2, 8-month-old French and Japanese did not differ significantly from 
each other. In Experiment 3, we found that, like adults, Japanese infants can 
discriminate abna from abuna when phonetic variability is reduced (single item). 
These results show that the phonologically induced /u/ illusion is already 
experienced by Japanese infants at the age of 14 months. Hence, before having 
acquired many words of their language, they have grasped enough of their native 
phonological grammar to constrain their perception of speech sound sequences.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01015.x
PMID: 21676090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


632. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):679-92. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01012.x. Epub 2010 
Nov 23.

Using confirmatory factor analysis to understand executive control in preschool 
children: sources of variation in emergent mathematic achievement.

Bull R(1), Espy KA, Wiebe SA, Sheffield TD, Nelson JM.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Aberdeen, UK.

Latent variable modeling methods have demonstrated utility for understanding the 
structure of executive control (EC) across development. These methods are 
utilized to better characterize the relation between EC and mathematics 
achievement in the preschool period, and to understand contributing sources of 
individual variation. Using the sample and battery of laboratory tasks described 
in Wiebe, Espy and Charak (2008), latent EC was related strongly to emergent 
mathematics achievement in preschool, and was robust after controlling for 
crystallized intellectual skills. The relation between crystallized skills and 
emergent mathematics differed between girls and boys, although the predictive 
association between EC and mathematics did not. Two dimensions of the child 's 
social environment contributed to mathematics achievement: social network 
support through its relation to EC and environmental stressors through its 
relation with crystallized skills. These findings underscore the need to examine 
the dimensions, mechanisms, and individual pathways that influence the 
development of early competence in basic cognitive processes that underpin early 
academic achievement.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01012.x
PMCID: PMC3117199
PMID: 21676089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


633. Dev Sci. 2011 May;14(3):591-601. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01022.x.

Gains in fluid intelligence after training non-verbal reasoning in 4-year-old 
children: a controlled, randomized study.

Bergman Nutley S(1), Söderqvist S, Bryde S, Thorell LB, Humphreys K, Klingberg 
T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. 
sissela.bergman.nutley@ki.se

Fluid intelligence (Gf) predicts performance on a wide range of cognitive 
activities, and children with impaired Gf often experience academic 
difficulties. Previous attempts to improve Gf have been hampered by poor control 
conditions and single outcome measures. It is thus still an open question 
whether Gf can be improved by training. This study included 4-year-old children 
(N = 101) who performed computerized training (15 min/day for 25 days) of either 
non-verbal reasoning, working memory, a combination of both, or a placebo 
version of the combined training. Compared to the placebo group, the non-verbal 
reasoning training group improved significantly on Gf when analysed as a latent 
variable of several reasoning tasks. Smaller gains on problem solving tests were 
seen in the combination training group. The group training working memory 
improved on measures of working memory, but not on problem solving tests. This 
study shows that it is possible to improve Gf with training, which could have 
implications for early interventions in children.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01022.x
PMID: 21477197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


634. Dev Sci. 2011 May;14(3):582-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01005.x. Epub 2010 
Nov 23.

Differential effects of reasoning and speed training in children.

Mackey AP(1), Hill SS, Stone SI, Bunge SA.

Author information:
(1)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California at Berkeley, CA 
94720, USA. a_mackey@berkeley.edu

The goal of this study was to determine whether intensive training can 
ameliorate cognitive skills in children. Children aged 7 to 9 from low 
socioeconomic backgrounds participated in one of two cognitive training programs 
for 60 minutes/day and 2 days/week, for a total of 8 weeks. Both training 
programs consisted of commercially available computerized and non-computerized 
games. Reasoning training emphasized planning and relational integration; speed 
training emphasized rapid visual detection and rapid motor responses. Standard 
assessments of reasoning ability - the Test of Non-Verbal Intelligence (TONI-3) 
and cognitive speed (Coding B from WISC IV) - were administered to all children 
before and after training. Neither group was exposed to these standardized tests 
during training. Children in the reasoning group improved substantially on TONI 
(Cohen's d = 1.51), exhibiting an average increase of 10 points in Performance 
IQ, but did not improve on Coding. By contrast, children in the speed group 
improved substantially on Coding (d = 1.15), but did not improve on TONI. 
Counter to widespread belief, these results indicate that both fluid reasoning 
and processing speed are modifiable by training.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01005.x
PMID: 21477196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


635. Dev Sci. 2011 May;14(3):549-65. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01002.x. Epub 2010 
Nov 11.

Object recognition in Williams syndrome: uneven ventral stream activation.

O'Hearn K(1), Roth JK, Courtney SM, Luna B, Street W, Terwillinger R, Landau B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, USA. ohearnk@upmc.edu

Williams syndrome (WS) is a genetic disorder associated with severe visuospatial 
deficits, relatively strong language skills, heightened social interest, and 
increased attention to faces. On the basis of the visuospatial deficits, this 
disorder has been characterized primarily as a deficit of the dorsal stream, the 
occipitoparietal brain regions that subserve visuospatial processing. However, 
some evidence indicates that this disorder may also affect the development of 
the ventral stream, the occipitotemporal cortical regions that subserve face and 
object recognition. The present studies examined ventral stream function in WS, 
with the hypothesis that faces would produce a relatively more mature pattern of 
ventral occipitotemporal activation, relative to other objects that are also 
represented across these visual areas. Using functional magnetic imaging, we 
compared activation patterns during viewing of human faces, cat faces, houses 
and shoes in individuals with WS (age 14-27), typically developing 6-9-year-olds 
(matched approximately on mental age), and typically developing 14-26-year-olds 
(matched on chronological age). Typically developing individuals exhibited 
changes in the pattern of activation over age, consistent with previous reports. 
The ventral stream topography of individuals with WS differed from both control 
groups, however, reflecting the same level of activation to face stimuli as 
chronological age matches, but less activation to house stimuli than either 
mental age or chronological age matches. We discuss the possible causes of this 
unusual topography and implications for understanding the behavioral profile of 
people with WS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01002.x
PMCID: PMC3074094
PMID: 21477194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


636. Dev Sci. 2011 May;14(3):490-501. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00992.x. Epub 
2010 Sep 6.

Exogenous attention influences visual short-term memory in infants.

Ross-Sheehy S(1), Oakes LM, Luck SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. 
shannon-ross@uiowa.edu

Two experiments examined the hypothesis that developing visual attentional 
mechanisms influence infants' Visual Short-Term Memory (VSTM) in the context of 
multiple items. Five- and 10-month-old infants (N = 76) received a change 
detection task in which arrays of three differently colored squares appeared and 
disappeared. On each trial one square changed color and one square was cued; 
sometimes the cued item was the changing item, and sometimes the changing item 
was not the cued item. Ten-month-old infants exhibited enhanced memory for the 
cued item when the cue was a spatial pre-cue (Experiment 1) and 5-month-old 
infants exhibited enhanced memory for the cued item when the cue was relative 
motion (Experiment 2). These results demonstrate for the first time that infants 
younger than 6 months can encode information in VSTM about individual items in 
multiple-object arrays, and that attention-directing cues influence both 
perceptual and VSTM encoding of stimuli in infants as in adults.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00992.x
PMCID: PMC3076103
PMID: 21477189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


637. Dev Sci. 2011 May;14(3):481-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00994.x. Epub 2010 
Sep 6.

A new measure for assessing executive function across a wide age range: children 
and adults find happy-sad more difficult than day-night.

Lagattuta KH(1), Sayfan L, Monsour M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Center for Mind and Brain, University of 
California, Davis, CA 95616, USA. khlaga@ucdavis.edu

Two experiments examined 4- to 11-year-olds' and adults' performance (N = 350) 
on two variants of a Stroop-like card task: the day-night task (say 'day' when 
shown a moon and 'night' when shown a sun) and a new happy-sad task (say 'happy' 
for a sad face and 'sad' for a happy face). Experiment 1 featured colored 
cartoon drawings. In Experiment 2, the happy-sad task featured photographs, and 
pictures for both measures were gray scale. All age groups made more errors and 
took longer to respond to the happy-sad versus the day-night versions. Unlike 
the day-night task, the happy-sad task did not suffer from ceiling effects, even 
in adults. The happy-sad task provides a methodological advance for measuring 
executive function across a wide age range.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00994.x
PMID: 21477188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


638. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):360-71. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00987.x.

Neural signatures of number processing in human infants: evidence for two core 
systems underlying numerical cognition.

Hyde DC(1), Spelke ES.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Studies, Department of Psychology, Harvard 
University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. dchyde@fas.harvard.edu

Behavioral research suggests two cognitive systems are at the foundations of 
numerical thinking: one for representing 1-3 objects in parallel and one for 
representing and comparing large, approximate numerical magnitudes. We tested 
for dissociable neural signatures of these systems in preverbal infants, by 
recording event-related potentials (ERPs) as 6-7.5 month-old infants (n = 32) 
viewed dot arrays containing either small (1-3) or large (8-32) sets of objects 
in a number alternation paradigm. If small and large numbers are represented by 
the same neural system, then the brain response to the arrays should scale with 
ratio for both number ranges, a behavioral and brain signature of the 
approximate numerical magnitude system obtained in animals and in human adults. 
Contrary to this prediction, a mid-latency positivity (P500) over parietal scalp 
sites was modulated by the ratio between successive large, but not small, 
numbers. Conversely, an earlier peaking positivity (P400) over 
occipital-temporal sites was modulated by the absolute cardinal value of small, 
but not large, numbers. These results provide evidence for two early developing 
systems of non-verbal numerical cognition: one that responds to small quantities 
as individual objects and a second that responds to large quantities as 
approximate numerical values. These brain signatures are functionally similar to 
those observed in previous studies of non-symbolic number with adults, 
suggesting that this dissociation may persist over vast differences in 
experience and formal training in mathematics.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00987.x
PMCID: PMC3050652
PMID: 21399717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


639. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):181-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00968.x.

An image is worth a thousand words: why nouns tend to dominate verbs in early 
word learning.

McDonough C(1), Song L, Hirsh-Pasek K, Golinkoff RM, Lannon R.

Author information:
(1)Neumann University, Aston, PA 19014, USA. mcdonouc@neumann.edu

Nouns are generally easier to learn than verbs (e.g., Bornstein, 2005; Bornstein 
et al., 2004; Gentner, 1982; Maguire, Hirsh-Pasek, & Golinkoff, 2006). Yet, 
verbs appear in children's earliest vocabularies, creating a seeming paradox. 
This paper examines one hypothesis about the difference between noun and verb 
acquisition. Perhaps the advantage nouns have is not a function of grammatical 
form class but rather related to a word's imageability. Here, word imageability 
ratings and form class (nouns and verbs) were correlated with age of acquisition 
according to the MacArthur-Bates Communicative Development Inventory (CDI) 
(Fenson et al., 1994). CDI age of acquisition was negatively correlated with 
words' imageability ratings. Further, a word's imageability contributes to the 
variance of the word's age of acquisition above and beyond form class, 
suggesting that at the beginning of word learning, imageability might be a 
driving factor.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00968.x
PMCID: PMC3043374
PMID: 21359165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


640. Dev Sci. 2011 Jan;14(1):125-35. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00962.x.

The development of numerical estimation: evidence against a representational 
shift.

Barth HC(1), Paladino AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Wesleyan University, 207 High Street, Middletown, 
CT 06459, USA. hbarth@wesleyan.edu

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1194-204; discussion 1205-6.

How do our mental representations of number change over development? The 
dominant view holds that children (and adults) possess multiple representations 
of number, and that age and experience lead to a shift from greater reliance 
upon logarithmically organized number representations to greater reliance upon 
more accurate, linear representations. Here we present a new theoretically 
motivated and empirically supported account of the development of numerical 
estimation, based on the idea that number-line estimation tasks entail judgments 
of proportion. We extend existing models of perceptual proportion judgment to 
the case of abstract numerical magnitude. Two experiments provide support for 
these models; three likely sources of developmental change in children's 
estimation performance are identified and discussed. This work demonstrates that 
proportion-judgment models provide a unified account of estimation patterns that 
have previously been explained in terms of a developmental shift from 
logarithmic to linear representations of number.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00962.x
PMID: 21159094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


641. Dev Sci. 2011 Jan;14(1):106-11. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00965.x.

Children's selective trust in native-accented speakers.

Kinzler KD(1), Corriveau KH, Harris PL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, 5848 S. University Ave., 
Chicago, IL 60637, USA. kinzler@uchicago.edu

Across two experiments, preschool-aged children demonstrated selective learning 
of non-linguistic information from native-accented rather than foreign-accented 
speakers. In Experiment 1, children saw videos of a native- and a 
foreign-accented speaker of English who each spoke for 10 seconds, and then 
silently demonstrated different functions with novel objects. Children 
selectively endorsed the silent object function provided by the native-accented 
speaker. In Experiment 2, children again endorsed the native-accented over the 
foreign-accented speaker, even though both informants previously spoke only in 
nonsense speech. Thus, young children demonstrate selective trust in 
native-accented speakers even when neither informant's speech relays meaningful 
semantic content, and the information that both informants provide is 
non-linguistic. We propose that children orient towards members of their native 
community to guide their early cultural learning.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00965.x
PMID: 21159092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


642. Dev Sci. 2011 Jan;14(1):44-57. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00954.x.

Piecing together numerical language: children's use of default units in early 
counting and quantification.

Brooks N(1), Pogue A, Barner D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California-San Diego, 9500 Gilman 
Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

When asked to 'find three forks', adult speakers of English use the noun 'fork' 
to identify units for counting. However, when number words (e.g. three) and 
quantifiers (e.g. more, every) are used with unfamiliar words ('Give me three 
blickets') noun-specific conceptual criteria are unavailable for picking out 
units. This poses a problem for young children learning language, who begin to 
use quantifiers and number words by age 2, despite knowing a relatively small 
number of nouns. Without knowing how individual nouns pick out units of 
quantification--e.g. what counts as a blicket--how could children decide whether 
there are three blickets or four? Three experiments suggest that children might 
solve this problem by assigning 'default units' of quantification to number 
words, quantifiers, and number morphology. When shown objects that are broken 
into arbitrary pieces, 4-year-olds in Experiment 1 treated pieces as units when 
counting, interpreting quantifiers, and when using singular-plural morphology. 
Experiment 2 found that although children treat object-hood as sufficient for 
quantification, it is not necessary. Also sufficient for individuation are the 
criteria provided by known nouns. When two nameable things were glued together 
(e.g. two cups), children counted the glued things as two. However, when two 
arbitrary pieces of an object were put together (e.g. two parts of a ball), 
children counted them as one, even if they had previously counted the pieces as 
two. Experiment 3 found that when the pieces of broken things were nameable 
(e.g. wheels of a bicycle), 4-year-olds did not include them in counts of whole 
objects (e.g. bicycles). We discuss the role of default units in early language 
acquisition, their origin in acquisition, and how children eventually acquire an 
adult semantics identifying units of quantification.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00954.x
PMID: 21159087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


643. Dev Sci. 2011 Jan;14(1):26-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00950.x.

Children's capacity to remember a novel problem and to secure its future 
solution.

Suddendorf T(1), Nielsen M, von Gehlen R.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, 
Australia. t.suddendorf@psy.uq.edu.au

Much of humans' success rests on foresight, the ability to predict what will 
happen or what is needed in the future. Surprisingly little is known about how 
this faculty develops. In three experiments (N = 170), 3- and 4-year-old 
children were presented with simple puzzles. Fifteen minutes later in a 
different room they were given the opportunity to secure a solution to take back 
to the puzzle. Only the older children performed above chance, whereas both age 
groups could solve the task in an instant condition. The same pattern of results 
emerged for another task involving selection of something to 'feed ' a puppet 
whose favorite food was initially unavailable. Control conditions suggest that 
temporal rather than spatial displacement influenced performance. Verbal reports 
substantiated the conclusion that by age 4 some children can remember a novel 
problem sufficiently enough to recognize a solution and select that solution in 
anticipation of applying it to the problem in the future.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00950.x
PMID: 21159085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


644. Dev Sci. 2011 Jan;14(1):9-17. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00947.x.

Not your mother's view: the dynamics of toddler visual experience.

Smith LB(1), Yu C, Pereira AF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 1101 East 
10th Street, Bloomington, IN 47405, USA. smith4@indiana.edu

Human toddlers learn about objects through second-by-second, minute-by-minute 
sensory-motor interactions. In an effort to understand how toddlers' bodily 
actions structure the visual learning environment, mini-video cameras were 
placed low on the foreheads of toddlers, and for comparison also on the 
foreheads of their parents, as they jointly played with toys. Analyses of the 
head camera views indicate visual experiences with profoundly different dynamic 
structures. The toddler view often consists of a single dominating object that 
is close to the sensors and thus that blocks the view of other objects such that 
individual objects go in and out of view. The adult view, in contrast, is broad 
and stable, with all potential targets continually in view. These differences 
may arise for several developmentally relevant reasons, including the small 
visuo-motor workspace of the toddler (short arms) and the engagement of the 
whole body when actively handling objects.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00947.x
PMCID: PMC3050020
PMID: 21159083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


645. Dev Sci. 2010 Nov;13(6):907-12. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00946.x.

Seventeen-month-olds appeal to false beliefs to interpret others' referential 
communication.

Southgate V(1), Chevallier C, Csibra G.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, School of Psychology, Birkbeck, 
University of London, UK. v.southgate@bbk.ac.uk

Recent studies have demonstrated infants' pragmatic abilities for resolving the 
referential ambiguity of non-verbal communicative gestures, and for inferring 
the intended meaning of a communicator's utterances. These abilities are 
difficult to reconcile with the view that it is not until around 4 years that 
children can reason about the internal mental states of others. In the current 
study, we tested whether 17-month-old infants are able to track the status of a 
communicator's epistemic state and use this to infer what she intends to refer 
to. Our results show that manipulating whether or not a communicator has a false 
belief leads infants to different interpretations of the same communicative act, 
and demonstrate early mental state attribution in a pragmatic context.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00946.x
PMID: 20977561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


646. Dev Sci. 2010 Nov;13(6):864-75. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00942.x.

Face scanning distinguishes social from communication impairments in autism.

Falck-Ytter T(1), Fernell E, Gillberg C, von Hofsten C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Uppsala University, Sweden. 
terje.falckytter@psyk.uu.se

How closely related are the social and communicative impairments in Autism 
Spectrum Disorder (ASD)? Recent findings in typically developing children 
suggest that both types of impairment are highly heritable but have only 
moderate behavioural and genetic overlap. So far, their respective roles in 
social perception are poorly understood. Here we show that when looking at other 
people's faces, children with ASD who are better at socio-emotional behaviours 
than non-verbal communication look more at the eyes, while those with the 
opposite profile look more at the mouth (Study 1). For the mouth area, a similar 
pattern was observed for inverted faces, suggesting that information from this 
area is perceived on a featural basis. In Study 2, we found that when shown a 
person performing manual actions, 'eye-lookers' from Study 1 tended to look most 
at the face of the actor, while 'mouth-lookers' from Study 1 tended to look at 
the action itself (hand/objects). This result was found in both ASD and typical 
development. In Study 3, the main finding in Study 1 was replicated in a new 
sample. Taken together, we interpret these results as supporting the view that 
the neural systems underlying socio-emotional versus non-verbal communication 
skills are separable, a finding that has important theoretical and clinical 
implications. The results also suggest that a similar differentiation of looking 
behaviour may operate in normal development.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00942.x
PMID: 20977557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


647. Dev Sci. 2010 Nov;13(6):805-12. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01013.x.

Attention trajectories, mechanisms and outcomes: at the interface between 
developing cognition and environment.

Scerif G(1).

Author information:
(1)Attention, Brain and Cognitive Development Group, Department of Experimental 
Psychology, University of Oxford, UK. gaia.scerif@psy.ox.ac.uk

Attentional processes play a crucial role in prioritizing information for 
further processing and they therefore sit at the interface between internal 
goals and the challenges presented by the environment. How does attentional 
control interact with the changing constraints imposed by the developing 
cognitive system? Emerging work in this area has employed a range of 
complementary techniques, from increasingly refined neurocognitive measures in 
typically developing individuals, to the investigation of risk or protective 
factors influencing attention trajectories in developmental disorders. A growing 
corpus of data suggests that, while attentional biases for specific input 
characteristics (e.g. suddenly appearing stimuli, emotional expressions) are in 
place from infancy, it is the interplay between these predispositions, genetic 
and environmental factors that drives attention development over time. With the 
advent of multidisciplinary approaches to the developmental cognitive 
neuroscience of attention, unravelling these complex dynamics from infancy and 
their outcome on learning is increasingly within reach.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01013.x
PMID: 20977552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


648. Dev Sci. 2010 Sep 1;13(5):798-803. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00943.x.

Twelve- to 14-month-old infants can predict single-event probability with large 
set sizes.

Denison S(1), Xu F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, 3210 Tolman Hall, University of 
California-Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. smdeniso@berkeley.edu

Previous research has revealed that infants can reason correctly about 
single-event probabilities with small but not large set sizes (Bonatti, 2008; 
Teglas et al., 2007). The current study asks whether infants can make 
predictions regarding single-event probability with large set sizes using a 
novel procedure. Infants completed two trials: A preference trial to determine 
whether they preferred pink or black lollipops and a test trial where infants 
saw two jars, one containing mostly pink lollipops and another containing mostly 
black lollipops. The experimenter removed one occluded lollipop from each jar 
and placed them in two separate opaque cups. Seventy-eight percent of infants 
searched in the cup that contained a lollipop from the jar with a higher 
proportion of their preferred color object, significantly better than chance. 
Thus infants can reason about single-event probabilities with large set sizes in 
a choice paradigm, and contrary to most findings in the infant literature, the 
prediction task used here appears a more sensitive measure than the standard 
looking-time task.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00943.x
PMID: 20712746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


649. Dev Sci. 2010 Sep 1;13(5):790-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00936.x.

Imprinted numbers: newborn chicks' sensitivity to number vs. continuous extent 
of objects they have been reared with.

Rugani R(1), Regolin L, Vallortigara G.

Author information:
(1)Center for Mind/Brain Sciences, University of Trento, Corso Bettini, 31, 
38068 Rovereto (Trento), Italy. rosa.rugani@unitn.it

Newborn chicks were tested for their sensitivity to number vs. continuous 
physical extent of artificial objects they had been reared with soon after 
hatching. Because of the imprinting process, such objects were treated by chicks 
as social companions. We found that when the objects were similar, chicks faced 
with choices between 1 vs. 2 or 2 vs. 3 objects chose the set of objects of 
larger numerosity, irrespective of the number of objects they had been reared 
with. Moreover, when volume, surface or contour length were controlled for using 
sets of 1 vs. 4, 1 vs. 6 or 1 vs. 3 objects, chicks resorted to choosing the 
larger object, rather than the familiar numerosity. When, however, chicks were 
reared with objects differing in their aspect (colour, size, and shape) and then 
tested with completely novel objects (of different colour and shape but 
controlled for continuous extent), they chose to associate with the same number 
of objects they had been reared with. These results suggest that identification 
of objects as different and separate individuals is crucial for the computation 
of number rather than continuous extent in numerical representation of small 
numerosities and provide a striking parallel with results obtained in human 
infants. Early availability of small numerosity discrimination by chicks 
strongly suggests that these abilities are in place at birth.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00936.x
PMID: 20712745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


650. Dev Sci. 2010 Sep 1;13(5):761-71. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00934.x.

Early development of spatial-numeric associations: evidence from spatial and 
quantitative performance of preschoolers.

Opfer JE(1), Thompson CA, Furlong EE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, 1835 Neil Avenue, 
Columbus, OH 43210, USA. opfer.7@osu.edu

Numeric magnitudes often bias adults' spatial performance. Partly because the 
direction of this bias (left-to-right versus right-to-left) is culture-specific, 
it has been assumed that the orientation of spatial-numeric associations is a 
late development, tied to reading practice or schooling. Challenging this 
assumption, we found that preschoolers expected numbers to be ordered from 
left-to-right when they searched for objects in numbered containers, when they 
counted, and (to a lesser extent) when they added and subtracted. Further, 
preschoolers who lacked these biases demonstrated more immature, logarithmic 
representations of numeric value than preschoolers who exhibited the directional 
bias, suggesting that spatial-numeric associations aid magnitude representations 
for symbols denoting increasingly large numbers.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00934.x
PMID: 20712742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


651. Dev Sci. 2010 Sep 1;13(5):752-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00933.x.

Sex differences in language first appear in gesture.

Ozçalişkan S(1), Goldin-Meadow S.

Author information:
(1)Georgia State University, Department of Psychology, PO Box 5010, Atlanta, GA 
30302-5010, USA. seyda@gsu.edu

Children differ in how quickly they reach linguistic milestones. Boys typically 
produce their first multi-word sentences later than girls do. We ask here 
whether there are sex differences in children's gestures that precede, and 
presage, these sex differences in speech. To explore this question, we observed 
22 girls and 18 boys every 4 months as they progressed from one-word speech to 
multi-word speech. We found that boys not only produced speech + speech (S+S) 
combinations ('drink juice') 3 months later than girls, but they also produced 
gesture + speech (G+S) combinations expressing the same types of semantic 
relations ('eat' + point at cookie) 3 months later than girls. Because G+S 
combinations are produced earlier than S+S combinations, children's gestures 
provide the first sign that boys are likely to lag behind girls in the onset of 
sentence constructions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00933.x
PMCID: PMC2923747
PMID: 20712741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


652. Dev Sci. 2010 Sep 1;13(5):738-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00935.x.

Medial temporal lobe memory in childhood: developmental transitions.

Townsend EL(1), Richmond JL, Vogel-Farley VK, Thomas K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, 
MGH Institute of Health Professions, Boston, USA. etownsend@mghihp.edu

The medial temporal lobes (MTL) support declarative memory and mature 
structurally and functionally during the postnatal years in humans. Although 
recent work has addressed the development of declarative memory in early 
childhood, less is known about continued development beyond this period of time. 
The purpose of this investigation was to explore MTL-dependent memory across 
middle childhood. Children (6 -10 years old) and adults completed two 
computerized tasks, place learning (PL) and transitive inference (TI), that each 
examined relational memory, as well as the flexible use of relational learning. 
Findings suggest that the development of relational memory precedes the 
development of the ability to use relational knowledge flexibly in novel 
situations. Implications for the development of underlying brain areas and ideas 
for future neuroimaging investigations are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00935.x
PMCID: PMC2923751
PMID: 20712740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


653. Dev Sci. 2010 Sep 1;13(5):714-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00931.x.

The Ebbinghaus illusion deceives adults but not young children.

Doherty MJ(1), Campbell NM, Tsuji H, Phillips WA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Stirling, Stirling FK9 4LA, UK. 
mjd1@stir.ac.uk

The sensitivity of size perception to context has been used to distinguish 
between 'vision for action' and 'vision for perception', and to study cultural, 
psychopathological, and developmental differences in perception. The status of 
that evidence is much debated, however. Here we use a rigorous double 
dissociation paradigm based on the Ebbinghaus illusion, and find that for 
children below 7 years of age size discrimination is much less affected by 
surround size. Young children are less accurate than adults when context is 
helpful, but more accurate when context is misleading. Even by the age of 10 
years context-sensitivity is still not at adult levels. Therefore, size contrast 
as shown by the Ebbinghaus illusion is not a built-in property of the ventral 
pathway subserving vision for perception but a late development of it, and low 
sensitivity to the Ebbinghaus illusion in autism is not primary to the 
pathology. Our findings also show that, although adults in Western cultures have 
low context-sensitivity relative to East Asians, they have high 
context-sensitivity relative to children. Overall, these findings reveal a 
gradual developmental trend toward ever broader contextual syntheses. Such 
developments are advantageous, but the price paid for them is that, when context 
is misleading, adults literally see the world less accurately than they did as 
children.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00931.x
PMID: 20712737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


654. Dev Sci. 2010 Sep 1;13(5):706-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00926.x.

The role of competition in word learning via referent selection.

Horst JS(1), Scott EJ, Pollard JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Sussex, UK. jessica@sussex.ac.uk

Previous research suggests that competition among the objects present during 
referent selection influences young children's ability to learn words in fast 
mapping tasks. The present study systematically explored this issue with 
30-month-old children. Children first received referent selection trials with a 
target object and either two, three or four competitor objects. Then, after a 
short delay, children were tested on their ability to retain the newly 
fast-mapped names. Overall, the number of competitors did not affect children's 
ability to form the initial name-object mappings. However, only children who 
encountered few competitors during referent selection demonstrated significant 
levels of retention. Results and implications are discussed in terms of the role 
of competition in studies of children's fast mapping. The relationship between 
referent selection and full word learning is also discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00926.x
PMID: 20712736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


655. Dev Sci. 2010 Sep 1;13(5):677-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00924.x.

Individual differences in language development: relationship with motor skill at 
21 months.

Alcock KJ(1), Krawczyk K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Fylde College, Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 
4YF, UK. k.j.alcock@lancaster.ac.uk

Language development has long been associated with motor development, 
particularly manual gesture. We examined a variety of motor abilities - manual 
gesture including symbolic, meaningless and sequential memory, oral motor 
control, gross and fine motor control - in 129 children aged 21 months. Language 
abilities were assessed and cognitive and socio-economic measures controlled 
for. Oral motor control was strongly associated with language production 
(vocabulary and sentence complexity), with some contribution from symbolic 
abilities. Language comprehension, however, was associated with cognitive and 
socio-economic measures. We conclude that symbolic, working memory, and mirror 
neuron accounts of language-motor control links are limited, but that a common 
neural and motor substrate for nonverbal and verbal oral movements may drive the 
motor-language association.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00924.x
PMID: 20712734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


656. Dev Sci. 2010 Jul;13(4):622-35. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00921.x.

Selective attention and attention switching: towards a unified developmental 
approach.

Hanania R(1), Smith LB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 
Bloomington, IN 47405, USA. rhanania@indiana.edu

We review and relate two literatures on the development of attention in 
children: one concerning flexible attention switching and the other concerning 
selective attention. The first is a growing literature on preschool children's 
performances in an attention-switching task indicating that children become more 
flexible in their attentional control during the preschool years. The second 
literature encompasses a large and robust set of phenomena for the same 
developmental period that indicates a protracted course of development for 
selective attention in children. We ask whether developmental changes in 
processes of selective attention may contribute to more flexible attention 
switching. We consider the two sets of phenomena with respect to this question 
and propose an empirical agenda for their joint study that may lead ultimately 
to a unified account of the development of selective attention and attention 
switching.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00921.x
PMCID: PMC2939469
PMID: 20590726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


657. Dev Sci. 2010 Jul;13(4):578-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00915.x.

Analogical reasoning ability in autistic and typically developing children.

Morsanyi K(1), Holyoak KJ.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Plymouth, UK. 
kinga.morsanyi@plymouth.ac.uk

Recent studies (e.g. Dawson et al., 2007) have reported that autistic people 
perform in the normal range on the Raven Progressive Matrices test, a formal 
reasoning test that requires integration of relations as well as the ability to 
infer rules and form high-level abstractions. Here we compared autistic and 
typically developing children, matched on age, IQ, and verbal and non-verbal 
working memory, using both the Raven test and pictorial tests of analogical 
reasoning. Whereas the Raven test requires only formal analogical reasoning, the 
other analogy tests require use of real-world knowledge, as well as inhibition 
of salient distractors. We found that autistic children performed as well as 
controls on all these tests of reasoning with relations. Our findings indicate 
that the basic ability to reason systematically with relations, for both 
abstract and thematic materials, is intact in autism.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00915.x
PMID: 20590722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


658. Dev Sci. 2010 Jul;13(4):553-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00900.x.

Categorization, categorical perception, and asymmetry in infants' representation 
of face race.

Anzures G(1), Quinn PC, Pascalis O, Slater AM, Lee K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Development and Applied Psychology, University of 
Toronto, Canada. gizelle.anzures@utoronto.ca

The present study examined whether 6- and 9-month-old Caucasian infants could 
categorize faces according to race. In Experiment 1, infants were familiarized 
with different female faces from a common ethnic background (i.e. either 
Caucasian or Asian) and then tested with female faces from a novel race 
category. Nine-month-olds were able to form discrete categories of Caucasian and 
Asian faces. However, 6-month-olds did not form discrete categories of faces 
based on race. In Experiment 2, a second group of 6- and 9-month-olds was tested 
to determine whether they could discriminate between different faces from the 
same race category. Results showed that both age groups could only discriminate 
between different faces from the own-race category of Caucasian faces. The 
findings of the two experiments taken together suggest that 9-month-olds formed 
a category of Caucasian faces that are further differentiated at the individual 
level. In contrast, although they could form a category of Asian faces, they 
could not discriminate between such other-race faces. This asymmetry in category 
formation at 9 months (i.e. categorization of own-race faces vs. categorical 
perception of other-race faces) suggests that differential experience with own- 
and other-race faces plays an important role in infants' acquisition of face 
processing abilities.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00900.x
PMCID: PMC3724535
PMID: 20590720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


659. Dev Sci. 2010 May;13(3):490-498. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00904.x.

Use of geometry for spatial reorientation in children applies only to symmetric 
spaces.

Lew AR(1), Gibbons B(1), Murphy C(1), Gavin Bremner J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Lancaster University, UK.

Proponents of the geometric module hypothesis argue that following 
disorientation, many species reorient by use of macro-environment geometry. It 
is suggested that attention to the surface layout geometry of natural terrain 
features may have been selected for over evolutionary time due to the enduring 
and unambiguous location information it provides. Paradoxically, however, tests 
of the hypothesis have been exclusively conducted in symmetric (hence 
'unnatural' and geometrically ambiguous) environments. The present series of 
studies examines reorientation by 18-month-3-year-old children in a rectangular 
versus irregular quadrilateral enclosure (Study 1), a rectangular versus 
irregular quadrilateral array (Study 2) and an isosceles versus irregular 
triangular array (Study 3). Children were successful in symmetric but not 
asymmetric environments, casting doubt on the functional argument for an 
empirical basis of the geometric module hypothesis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00904.x
PMID: 20443969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


660. Dev Sci. 2010 May;13(3):479-489. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00892.x.

36-month-olds conceal visual and auditory information from others.

Melis AP(1), Call J(1), Tomasello M(1).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.

By three years of age, children are skilled at assessing under which 
circumstances others can see things. However, nothing is known about whether 
they can use this knowledge to guide their own deceptive behaviour. Here we 
investigated 3-year-olds' ability to strategically inhibit or conceal forbidden 
actions that a nearby adult experimenter could see or hear. In the first 
experiment, children were more likely to disobey the adult when she did not have 
visual access to their activities than they were when she was looking at them. 
In the second experiment, in which the adult could never see the child, children 
refrained from making noise when engaging in a prohibited action that the adult 
might hear. These results suggest that by three years of age children use their 
knowledge of others' perceptual states to decide whether it is safe to commit a 
transgression and, moreover, actively conceal perceptual cues that could reveal 
to others their ongoing transgression.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00892.x
PMID: 20443968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


661. Dev Sci. 2010 May;13(3):454-468. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00894.x.

How do individuals with Williams syndrome learn a route in a real-world 
environment?

Farran EK(1), Blades M(1), Boucher J(1), Tranter LJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Human Development, Institute of Education, 
University of London, UKDepartment of Psychology, University of Sheffield, 
UKDepartment of Psychology, City University, London, UKSchool of Psychology and 
Clinical Language Sciences, University of Reading, UK.

Individuals with Williams syndrome (WS) show a specific deficit in visuo-spatial 
abilities. This finding, however, derives mainly from performance on small-scale 
laboratory-based tasks. This study investigated large-scale route learning in 
individuals with WS and two matched control groups (moderate learning difficulty 
group [MLD], typically developing group [TD]). In a non-labelling and a 
labelling (verbal information provided along the route) condition, participants 
were guided along one of two unfamiliar 1-km routes with 20 junctions, and then 
retraced the route themselves (two trials). The WS participants performed less 
well than the other groups, but given verbal information and repeated experience 
they learnt nearly all of the turns along the route. The extent of improvement 
in route knowledge (correct turns) in WS was comparable to that of the control 
groups. Relational knowledge (correctly identifying spatial relationships 
between landmarks), compared with the TD group, remained poor for both the WS 
and the MLD group. Assessment of the relationship between performance on the 
large-scale route-learning task and that on three small-scale tasks (maze 
learning, perspective taking, map use) showed no relationship for the TD 
controls, and only a few non-specific associations in the MLD and WS groups.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00894.x
PMID: 20443966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


662. Dev Sci. 2010 Mar;13(2):378-84. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00899.x.

Something old, something new: a developmental transition from familiarity to 
novelty preferences with hidden objects.

Shinskey JL(1), Munakata Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Royal Holloway, University of London, UK. 
jeanne.shinskey@rhul.ac.uk

Novelty seeking is viewed as adaptive, and novelty preferences in infancy 
predict cognitive performance into adulthood. Yet 7-month-olds prefer familiar 
stimuli to novel ones when searching for hidden objects, in contrast to their 
strong novelty preferences with visible objects (Shinskey & Munakata, 2005). 
According to a graded representations perspective on object knowledge, infants 
gradually develop stronger object representations through experience, such that 
representations of familiar objects can be better maintained, supporting greater 
search than with novel objects. Object representations should strengthen with 
further development to allow older infants to shift from familiarity to novelty 
preferences with hidden objects. The current study tested this prediction by 
presenting 24 11-month-olds with novel and familiar objects that were sometimes 
visible and sometimes hidden. Unlike 7-month-olds, 11-month-olds showed novelty 
preferences with both visible and hidden objects. This developmental shift from 
familiarity to novelty preference with hidden objects parallels one that infants 
show months earlier with perceptible stimuli, but the two transitions may 
reflect different underlying mechanisms. The current findings suggest both 
change and continuity in the adaptive development of object representations and 
associated cognitive processes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00899.x
PMCID: PMC2819673
PMID: 20136935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


663. Dev Sci. 2010 Mar;13(2):331-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00888.x.

Online usage of theory of mind continues to develop in late adolescence.

Dumontheil I(1), Apperly IA, Blakemore SJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, UK. 
i.dumontheil@ucl.ac.uk

The development of theory of mind use was investigated by giving a computerized 
task to 177 female participants divided into five age groups: Child I (7.3-9.7 
years); Child II (9.8-11.4); Adolescent I (11.5-13.9); Adolescent II 
(14.0-17.7); Adults (19.1-27.5). Participants viewed a set of shelves containing 
objects, which they were instructed to move by a 'director' who could see some 
but not all of the objects. Correct interpretation of critical instructions 
required participants to use the director's perspective and only move objects 
that the director could see. In a control condition, participants were asked to 
ignore objects in slots with a grey background. Accuracy improved similarly in 
both conditions between Child I and Adolescent II. However, while performance of 
the Adolescent II and Adult groups did not differ in the control condition, the 
Adolescent II group made more errors than the adults in the experimental 
condition. These results suggest that theory of mind use improves between late 
adolescence and adulthood. Thus, while theory of mind tasks are passed by age 4, 
these data indicate that the interaction between theory of mind and executive 
functions continues to develop in late adolescence.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00888.x
PMID: 20136929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


664. Dev Sci. 2010 Mar;13(2):307-19. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00885.x.

Representing intentions in self and other: studies of autism and typical 
development.

Williams D(1), Happé F.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Child Health, University College London, UK. 
david.williams.2@city.ac.uk

Two experiments were conducted to explore the extent to which individuals with 
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), as well as young typically developing (TD) 
children, are explicitly aware of their own and others' intentions. In 
Experiment 1, participants with ASD were significantly less likely than age- and 
ability-matched comparison participants to correctly recognize their own 
knee-jerk reflex movements as unintentional. Performance on this knee-jerk task 
was associated with performance on measures of false belief understanding, 
independent of age and verbal ability, in both participants with ASD and TD 
children. In Experiment 2, participants with ASD were significantly less able 
than comparison participants to correctly recognize their own or another 
person's mistaken actions as unintended, in a 'Transparent Intentions' task 
(Russell & Hill, 2001; Russell, Hill & Franco, 2001). Performance on aspects of 
the Transparent Intentions task was associated with performance on measures of 
false belief understanding, independent of age and verbal ability, in both 
participants with ASD and TD children. This study suggests that individuals with 
ASD have a diminished awareness of their own and others' intentions and that 
this diminution is associated with other impairments in theory of mind.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00885.x
PMID: 20136927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


665. Dev Sci. 2010 Mar;13(2):289-97. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00887.x.

Spontaneous analog number representations in 3-year-old children.

Cantlon JF(1), Safford KE, Brannon EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology & Neurocience and Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, 
Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA. jfc2@duke.edu

When enumerating small sets of elements nonverbally, human infants often show a 
set-size limitation whereby they are unable to represent sets larger than three 
elements. This finding has been interpreted as evidence that infants 
spontaneously represent small numbers with an object-file system instead of an 
analog magnitude system (Feigenson, Dehaene & Spelke, 2004). In contrast, 
non-human animals and adult humans have been shown to rely on analog magnitudes 
for representing both small and large numbers (Brannon & Terrace, 1998; Cantlon 
& Brannon, 2007; Cordes, Gelman, Gallistel & Whalen, 2001). Here we demonstrate 
that, like adults and non-human animals, children as young as 3 years of age 
spontaneously employ analog magnitude representations to enumerate both small 
and large sets. Moreover, we show that children spontaneously attend to 
numerical value in lieu of cumulative surface area. These findings provide 
evidence of young children's greater sensitivity to number relative to other 
quantities and demonstrate continuity in the process they spontaneously recruit 
to judge small and large values.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00887.x
PMCID: PMC2819667
PMID: 20136925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


666. Dev Sci. 2010 Mar;13(2):271-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00890.x.

Touch attenuates infants' physiological reactivity to stress.

Feldman R(1), Singer M, Zagoory O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and the Gonda Brain Sciences Center, Bar-Ilan 
University, Israel. feldman@mail.biu.ac.il

Animal studies demonstrate that maternal touch and contact regulate infant 
stress, and handling during periods of maternal deprivation attenuates the 
stress response. To measure the effects of touch on infant stress reactivity 
during simulated maternal deprivation, 53 dyads were tested in two paradigms: 
still-face (SF) and still-face with maternal touch (SF+T). Maternal and infant 
cortisol levels were sampled at baseline, reactivity, and recovery and mother's 
and infant's cardiac vagal tone were measured during the free play, still-face, 
and reunion episodes of the procedure. Cortisol reactivity was higher among 
infants in the SF condition and while cortisol decreased at recovery for infants 
in the SF+T, it further increased for those in the SF. Vagal tone showed a 
greater suppression when SF was not accompanied by maternal touch. Touch 
synchrony during free play was associated with higher infant vagal tone, whereas 
touch myssynchrony--maternal tactile stimulation while the infant gaze 
averts--correlated with higher maternal and infant cortisol. In humans, as in 
mammals, the provision of touch during moments of maternal unavailability 
reduces infants' physiological reactivity to stress.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00890.x
PMID: 20136923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


667. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):252-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00871.x.

Young children follow pointing over words in interpreting acts of reference.

Grassmann S(1), Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Deutscher Platz 6, 04103, 
Leipzig, Germany. grassmann@eva.mpg.de

Adults refer young children's attention to things in two basic ways: through the 
use of pointing (and other deictic gestures) and words (and other linguistic 
conventions). In the current studies, we referred young children (2- and 
4-year-olds) to things in conflicting ways, that is, by pointing to one object 
while indicating linguistically (in some way) a different object. In Study 1, a 
novel word was put into competition with a pointing gesture in a mutual 
exclusivity paradigm; that is, with a known and a novel object in front of the 
child, the adult pointed to the known object (e.g. a cup) while simultaneously 
requesting 'the modi'. In contrast to the findings of Jaswal and Hansen (2006), 
children followed almost exclusively the pointing gesture. In Study 2, when a 
known word was put into competition with a pointing gesture - the adult pointed 
to the novel object but requested 'the car'- children still followed the 
pointing gesture. In Study 3, the referent of the pointing gesture was doubly 
contradicted by the lexical information - the adult pointed to a known object 
(e.g. a cup) but requested 'the car'- in which case children considered pointing 
and lexical information equally strong. Together, these findings suggest that in 
disambiguating acts of reference, young children at both 2 and 4 years of age 
rely most heavily on pragmatic information (e.g. in a pointing gesture), and 
only secondarily on lexical conventions and principles.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00871.x
PMID: 20121881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


668. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):221-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00872.x.

Superior detection of threat-relevant stimuli in infancy.

LoBue V(1), DeLoache JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, VA 22904, USA. 
vl8m@virginia.edu

The ability to quickly detect potential threat is an important survival 
mechanism for humans and other animals. Past research has established that 
adults have an attentional bias for the detection of threat-relevant stimuli, 
including snakes and spiders as well as angry human faces. Recent studies have 
documented that preschool children also detect the presence of threatening 
stimuli more quickly than various non-threatening stimuli. Here we report the 
first evidence that this attentional bias is present even in infancy. In two 
experiments, 8- to 14-month-old infants responded more rapidly to snakes than to 
flowers and more rapidly to angry than to happy faces. These data provide the 
first evidence of enhanced visual detection of threat-relevant stimuli in 
infants and hence offer especially strong support for the existence of a general 
bias for the detection of threat in humans.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00872.x
PMID: 20121878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


669. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):213-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00877.x.

Young children's use of features to reorient is more than just associative: 
further evidence against a modular view of spatial processing.

Newcombe NS(1), Ratliff KR, Shallcross WL, Twyman AD.

Author information:
(1)Psychology Department, Temple University, 1701 N. 13th St, Philadelphia, PA 
19122, USA. newcombe@temple.edu

Proponents of a geometric module have argued that instances of young children's 
use of features as well as geometry to reorient can be explained by a two-stage 
process. In this model, only the first stage is a true reorientation, 
accomplished by using geometric information alone; features are considered in a 
second stage using association (Lee, Shusterman & Spelke, 2006). This account is 
contradicted by the data from two experiments. Experiment 1a sets the stage for 
Experiment 1b by showing that young children use geometric information to 
reorient in a complex geometric figure without a single principal axis of 
symmetry (an octagon). In such a figure, there are two sets of geometrically 
congruent corners, with four corners in each set. The addition of a colored wall 
leads to the existence of three geometrically congruent but, crucially, all 
unmarked corners; using the colored wall to distinguish among them could not be 
done associatively. In Experiment 1b, both 3- and 5-year-old children showed 
true non-associative reorientation using features by performing at above-chance 
levels on all-white trials. Experiment 2 used a paradigm without distinctive 
geometry, modeled on Lee et al. (2006), involving an equilateral triangle of 
hiding places located within a circular enclosure, but with a large stable 
feature rather than a small moveable one. Four-year-olds (the age group studied 
by Lee et al.) used features at above-chance levels. Thus, features can be used 
to reorient, in a way not dependent on association, in contradiction to the 
two-stage version of the modular view.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00877.x
PMID: 20121877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


670. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):181-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00876.x.

The role of experience during childhood in shaping the other-race effect.

de Heering A(1), de Liedekerke C, Deboni M, Rossion B.

Author information:
(1)Unité Cognition et Développement et Laboratoire de Neurophysiologie, 
Université Catholique de Louvain, Belgium. adelaide.deheering@uclouvain.be

It is well known that adults' face recognition is characterized by an 
'other-race effect' (ORE; see Meissner & Brigham, 2001), but few studies have 
investigated this ORE during the development of the face processing system. Here 
we examined the role of experience with other-race faces during childhood by 
testing a group of 6- to 14-year-old Asian children adopted between 2 and 26 
months in Caucasian families living in Western Europe, as well as a group of 
age-matched Caucasian children. The latter group showed a strong ORE in favour 
of own-race faces that was stable from 6 to 14 years of age. The adopted 
participants did not show a significant reversal of the ORE, unlike a recently 
reported study (Sangrigoli et al., 2005), but rather comparable results with 
Asian and Caucasian faces. Their pattern of performance was neither influenced 
by their age of adoption, nor by the amount of experience they accumulated 
during childhood with other-race faces. These results indicate that the balance 
of performance with Asian and Caucasian faces can be modulated, but not 
completely reversed, in children whose exposure to own- and other-race faces 
changes drastically during the period of maturation of the face recognition 
system, depending on the length of exposure to the new face race. Overall, 
experience appears to be crucial during childhood to shape the face recognition 
system towards the most predominant morphologies of faces present in the 
environment.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00876.x
PMID: 20121874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


671. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):151-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00878.x.

Dealing with conflicting information: young children's reliance on what they see 
versus what they are told.

Ma L(1), Ganea PA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 
1Z4, Canada. lilima@psych.ubc.ca

Children often learn about the world through direct observation. However, much 
of children's knowledge is acquired through the testimony of others. This 
research investigates how preschoolers weigh these two sources of information 
when they are in conflict. Children watched as an adult hid a toy in one 
location. Then the adult told children that the toy was in a different location 
(i.e. false testimony). When retrieving the toy, 4- and 5-year-olds relied on 
what they had seen and disregarded the adult's false testimony. However, most 
3-year-olds deferred to the false testimony, despite what they had directly 
observed. Importantly, with a positive searching experience based on what they 
saw, or with a single prior experience with an adult as unreliable, 3-year-olds 
subsequently relied on their first-hand observation and disregarded the adult's 
false testimony. Thus, young children may initially be credulous toward others' 
false testimony that contradicts their direct observation, but skepticism can 
develop quickly through experience.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00878.x
PMID: 20121871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


672. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):143-50. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00873.x.

Infants' individuation of agents and inert objects.

Surian L(1), Caldi S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Sciences, University of Trento, Corso Bettini, 31, 
38068 Rovereto (Trento), Italy. luca.surian@unitn.it

Using the violation-of-expectancy method, we investigated 10-month-old infants' 
ability to rely on dynamic features in object individuation processes. Infants 
were first familiarized to events in which two different objects repeatedly 
appeared and disappeared, one at a time from behind a screen; at test, the 
screen was removed, revealing either one or two objects. In Experiment 1, one 
self-moving non-rigid agent and one inert object were involved in each trial, 
while in Experiment 2 two different agents were presented. Infants preferred to 
look at one-object outcomes in Experiment 1, but they did not show any 
preference for one- or two-object outcomes in Experiment 2. The results suggest 
that infants can use dynamic information to detect agents in complex 
individuation tasks before they can rely on shape or surface features. We 
propose that the sortals agent and inert object appear in development before 12 
months without a substantial contribution of linguistic experience. These 
findings may motivate a revision of current theories on the development of 
kind-based individuation and object files.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00873.x
PMID: 20121870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


673. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):108-19. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00862.x.

Adults' social cues facilitate young children's use of signs and symbols.

Leekam SR(1), Solomon TL, Teoh YS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Durham University, UK. LeekamSR@cardiff.ac.uk

Three experiments investigated the effect of an adult's social cues on 2- and 
3-year-old children's ability to use a sign or symbol to locate a hidden object. 
Results showed that an adult's positive, engaging facial expression facilitated 
children's ability to identify the correct referent, particularly for 
3-year-olds. A neutral facial expression and the presence of the adult's hand 
also facilitated performance, but to a lesser degree than did an engaging facial 
expression. The effect of the adult's social cues was greater for relatively 
unfamiliar signs and symbols (replica or arrow) than it was for a more familiar 
sign (pointing finger). These findings indicate that non-directional social cues 
such as facial expression help to convey communicative intent and facilitate 
children's comprehension of signs and symbols.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00862.x
PMID: 20121867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


674. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):92-107. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00866.x.

Arithmetic word problem solving: a Situation Strategy First framework.

Brissiaud R(1), Sander E.

Author information:
(1)IUFM of Versailles, University of Cergy-Pontoise, France. 
remi.brissiaud@versailles.iufm.fr

Before instruction, children solve many arithmetic word problems with informal 
strategies based on the situation described in the problem. A Situation Strategy 
First framework is introduced that posits that initial representation of the 
problem activates a situation-based strategy even after instruction: only when 
it is not efficient for providing the numerical solution is the representation 
of the problem modified so that the relevant arithmetic knowledge might be used. 
Three experiments were conducted with Year 3 and Year 4 children. Subtraction, 
multiplication and division problems were created in two versions involving the 
same wording but different numerical values. The first version could be mentally 
solved with a Situation strategy (Si version) and the second with a Mental 
Arithmetic strategy (MA version). Results show that Si-problems are easier than 
MA-problems even after instruction, and, when children were asked to report 
their strategy by writing a number sentence, equations that directly model the 
situation were predominant for Si-problems but not for MA ones. Implications of 
the Situation Strategy First framework regarding the relation between conceptual 
and procedural knowledge and the development of arithmetic knowledge are 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00866.x
PMID: 20121866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


675. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):28-36. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00853.x.

Everyday scale errors.

Ware EA(1), Uttal DH, DeLoache JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, 530 Church St., Ann Arbor, 
MI 48109-1043, USA. eaware@umich.edu

Young children occasionally make scale errors- they attempt to fit their bodies 
into extremely small objects or attempt to fit a larger object into another, 
tiny, object. For example, a child might try to sit in a dollhouse-sized chair 
or try to stuff a large doll into it. Scale error research was originally 
motivated by parents' and researchers' informal accounts of these behaviors. 
However, scale errors have only been documented using laboratory procedures 
designed to promote their occurrence. To formally document the occurrence of 
scale errors in everyday settings, we posted a survey on the internet. Across 
two studies, participants reported many examples of everyday scale errors that 
are similar to those observed in our labs and were committed by children of the 
same age. These findings establish that scale errors occur in the course of 
children's daily lives, lending further support to the account that these 
behaviors stem from general aspects of visual processing.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00853.x
PMID: 20121860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


676. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):1-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00854.x.

Goal attribution to schematic animals: do 6-month-olds perceive biological 
motion as animate?

Schlottmann A(1), Ray E.

Author information:
(1)Division of Psychology & Language Sciences, University College London, Gower 
Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK. a.schlottmann@ucl.ac.uk

Infants are sensitive to biological motion, but do they recognize it as animate? 
As a first step towards answering this question, two experiments investigated 
whether 6-month-olds selectively attribute goals to shapes moving like animals. 
We habituated infants to a square moving towards one of two targets. When target 
locations were switched, infants reacted more to movement towards a new goal 
than a new location - but only if the square moved non-rigidly and rhythmically, 
in a schematic version of bio-mechanical movement older observers describe as 
animal-like (Michotte, 1963). Goal attribution was specific to schematic animal 
motion: It did not occur if the square moved rigidly with the same rhythm as the 
animate stimulus, or if the square had the same amount of non-rigid deformation, 
but in an inanimate configuration. The data would seem to show that perception 
of schematic animal motion is linked to a system for psychological reasoning 
from infancy. This in turn suggests that 6-month-olds may already interpret 
biological motion as animate.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00854.x
PMID: 20121858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


677. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):1070-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00856.x.

How do symbols affect 3- to 4-year-olds' executive function? Evidence from a 
reverse-contingency task.

Apperly IA(1), Carroll DJ.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, UK. 
i.a.apperly@bham.ac.uk

In two experiments, 330 3- to 4-year-olds competed for stickers in a game in 
which the optimal response strategy was to point to an empty box that their 
opponent would receive in order to obtain a baited box for themselves. When the 
baited box contained stickers, children showed a strong tendency to point at the 
baited box and therefore lose the stickers to their opponent. In Experiment 1 
children performed better when the number of stickers to be won was represented 
with one of five different types of symbol: numerals, number words, dots, a 
photograph or sweets. In Experiment 2 children transferred their improved 
performance in symbolic conditions to non-symbolic conditions. These findings 
suggest that symbols enable children to formulate an efficient response 
strategy, and that this effect may be qualitatively different in children from 
the effect of symbols in non-human primates.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00856.x
PMID: 19840061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


678. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):863-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00832.x.

Categorical flexibility in preschoolers: contributions of conceptual knowledge 
and executive control.

Blaye A(1), Jacques S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Psychologie Cognitive, Université de Provence, Aix en 
Provence, France. Agnes.Blaye@univ-provence.fr

The current study evaluated the relative roles of conceptual knowledge and 
executive control on the development of categorical flexibility, the ability to 
switch between simultaneously available but conflicting categorical 
representations of an object. Experiment 1 assessed conceptual knowledge and 
executive control together; Experiment 2 differentiated conceptual knowledge 
from costly executive processes. In Experiment 1, 3- to 5-year-olds were given a 
three-choice (taxonomic, thematic, and nonassociate) match-to-sample task and 
asked to match two associates. In Experiment 2, same-aged children were assessed 
on another match-to-sample task that reduced executive costs by presenting 
thematic and taxonomic associates on separate trials. By comparing performance 
across tasks, age-related changes resulting from conceptual knowledge and 
executive control indicated that conceptual knowledge of superordinate relations 
showed gains between 3 and 4 years, whereas gains in executive control were seen 
between 4 and 5 years, suggesting a décalage in the development of conceptual 
and executive processes underlying categorical flexibility.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00832.x
PMID: 19840042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


679. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):F26-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00919.x.

Auditory verb perception recruits motor systems in the developing brain: an fMRI 
investigation.

James KH(1), Maouene J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 
Bloomington, IN 47405, USA. khjames@indiana.edu

This study investigated neural activation patterns during verb processing in 
children, using fMRI (functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging). Preschool children 
(aged 4-6) passively listened to lists of verbs and adjectives while neural 
activation was measured. Findings indicated that verbs were processed 
differently than adjectives, as the verbs recruited motor systems in the frontal 
cortex during auditory perception, but the adjectives did not. Further evidence 
suggested that different types of verbs activated different regions in the motor 
cortex. The results demonstrate that the motor system is recruited during verb 
perception in the developing brain, reflecting the embodied nature of language 
learning and processing.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00919.x
PMID: 19840036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


680. Dev Sci. 2009 Sep;12(5):798-814. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00833.x.

Gaze behavior and affect at 6 months: predicting clinical outcomes and language 
development in typically developing infants and infants at risk for autism.

Young GS(1), Merin N, Rogers SJ, Ozonoff S.

Author information:
(1)MIND Institute, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, School of 
Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA 95817, USA. 
gregorys.young@ucdmc.ucdavis.edu

This paper presents follow-up longitudinal data to research that previously 
suggested the possibility of abnormal gaze behavior marked by decreased eye 
contact in a subgroup of 6-month-old infants at risk for autism (Merin, Young, 
Ozonoff & Rogers, 2007). Using eye-tracking data and behavioral data recorded 
during a live mother-infant interaction involving the still-face procedure, the 
predictive utility of gaze behavior and affective behaviors at 6 months was 
examined using diagnostic outcome data obtained longitudinally over the 
following 18 months. Results revealed that none of the infants previously 
identified as showing lower rates of eye contact had any signs of autism at 
outcome. In contrast, three infants who were diagnosed with autism demonstrated 
consistent gaze to the eye region and typical affective responses at 6 months. 
Individual differences in face scanning and affective responsivity during the 
live interaction were not related to any continuous measures of symptom 
frequency or symptom severity. In contrast, results of growth curve models for 
language development revealed significant relationships between face scanning 
and expressive language. Greater amounts of fixation to the mother's mouth 
during live interaction predicted higher levels of expressive language at 
outcome and greater rates of growth. These findings suggest that although gaze 
behavior at 6 months may not provide early markers for autism as initially 
conceived, gaze to the mouth in particular may be useful in predicting 
individual differences in language development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00833.x
PMCID: PMC2732664
PMID: 19702771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


681. Dev Sci. 2009 Sep;12(5):768-83. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00804.x.

Atypical brain responses to sounds in children with specific language and 
reading impairments.

McArthur G(1), Atkinson C, Ellis D.

Author information:
(1)Macquarie Centre for Cognitive Science, Macquarie University, NSW, Australia. 
genevieve.mcarthur@maccs.mq.edu.au

This study tested if children with specific language impairment (SLI) or 
children with specific reading disability (SRD) have abnormal brain responses to 
sounds. We tested 6- to 12-year-old children with SLI (N =19), children with SRD 
(N =55), and age-matched controls (N =36) for their passive auditory 
event-related potentials (ERPs) to tones, rapid tones, vowels and 
consonant-vowels. Thirty-eight percent of the children with SLI or SRD had less 
typical passive auditory ERPs in the N1-P2 window to sounds in general, rather 
than to tones, rapid tones, vowels or consonant-vowels specifically. The ERPs of 
these children were significantly 'flatter' in the N1-P2 region than normal. All 
the children with flatter ERPs in the N1-P2 region had poor non-word reading. A 
subgroup of these poor non-word readers also had poor non-word repetition. These 
findings support the hypothesis that impaired auditory processing is a causal 
risk factor for both SLI and SRD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00804.x
PMID: 19702769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


682. Dev Sci. 2009 Sep;12(5):725-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00814.x.

Weighting of vowel cues explains patterns of word-object associative learning.

Curtin S(1), Fennell C, Escudero P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Linguistics, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. 
scurtin@ucalgary.ca

Previous research has demonstrated that infants under 17 months have difficulty 
learning novel words in the laboratory when the words differ by only one 
consonant sound, irrespective of the magnitude of that difference. The current 
study explored whether 15-month-old infants can learn novel words that differ in 
only one vowel sound. The rich acoustic/phonetic properties of vowels allow for 
a detailed analysis of the contribution of acoustic/phonetic cues to infants' 
performance with similar-sounding words. Infants succeeded with the vowel pair 
/i/-/I/, but failed with vowel pairs /i/-/u/ and /I/-/u/. These results suggest 
that infants initially use the most salient acoustic cues for vowels and that 
this staged use of acoustic cues both predicts and explains why infants can 
learn some words that differ in only a single vowel.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00814.x
PMID: 19702765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


683. Dev Sci. 2009 Jul;12(4):662-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00799.x.

More than a matter of getting 'unstuck': flexible thinkers use more abstract 
representations than perseverators.

Kharitonova M(1), Chien S, Colunga E, Munakata Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA. 
maria.kharitonova@colorado.edu

Why do people perseverate, repeating prior behaviours that are no longer 
appropriate? Many accounts point to isolated deficits in processes such as 
inhibition or attention. We instead posit a fundamental difference in rule 
representations: flexible switchers use active representations that rely on 
later-developing prefrontal cortical areas and are more abstract, whereas 
perseverators use latent representations that rely on earlier-developing 
posterior cortical and subcortical areas and are more stimulus-specific. Thus, 
although switchers and perseverators should apply the rules they use to familiar 
stimuli equally reliably, perseverators should show unique limitations in 
generalizing their rules to novel stimuli, a process that requires abstract 
representations. Two behavioural experiments confirmed this counterintuitive 
prediction early in development. Three-year-old children sorted cards by one 
rule, were asked to switch to another rule, and then were asked simply to 
continue their behaviour, with novel cards. Perseverators applied the rule they 
were using (the first rule) just as reliably as switchers applied the rule they 
were using (the second rule) with familiar cards; however, only switchers 
generalized their rule to novel cards. This finding supports an early link 
between active representations that support switching and abstract 
representations that support generalization. We interpret this synergy in terms 
of prefrontal cortical development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00799.x
PMCID: PMC2735095
PMID: 19635091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


684. Dev Sci. 2009 Jul;12(4):521-35. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00793.x.

A competitive nonverbal false belief task for children and apes.

Krachun C(1), Carpenter M, Call J, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Comparative Psychology, Max Planck Institute 
for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.

A nonverbal false belief task was administered to children (mean age 5 years) 
and two great ape species: chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and bonobos (Pan 
paniscus). Because apes typically perform poorly in cooperative contexts, our 
task was competitive. Two versions were run: in both, a human competitor 
witnessed an experimenter hide a reward in one of two containers. When the 
competitor then left the room (version A) or turned around (version B), the 
experimenter switched the locations of the containers. The competitor returned 
and reached with effort, but unsuccessfully, towards the incorrect container. 
Children displayed an understanding of the competitor's false belief by 
correctly choosing the other container to find the reward. Apes did not. 
However, in version A (but not version B), apes looked more often at the 
unchosen container in false belief trials than in true belief control trials, 
possibly indicating some implicit or uncertain understanding that needs to be 
investigated further.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00793.x
PMID: 19635080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


685. Dev Sci. 2009 Jul;12(4):F9-15. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00848.x.

Adaptive training leads to sustained enhancement of poor working memory in 
children.

Holmes J(1), Gathercole SE, Dunning DL.

Author information:
(1)Division of Psychology, University of Northumbria, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK. 
joni.holmes@northumbria.ac.uk

Working memory plays a crucial role in supporting learning, with poor progress 
in reading and mathematics characterizing children with low memory skills. This 
study investigated whether these problems can be overcome by a training program 
designed to boost working memory. Children with low working memory skills were 
assessed on measures of working memory, IQ and academic attainment before and 
after training on either adaptive or non-adaptive versions of the program. 
Adaptive training that taxed working memory to its limits was associated with 
substantial and sustained gains in working memory, with age-appropriate levels 
achieved by the majority of children. Mathematical ability also improved 
significantly 6 months following adaptive training. These findings indicate that 
common impairments in working memory and associated learning difficulties may be 
overcome with this behavioral treatment.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00848.x
PMID: 19635074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


686. Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):438-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00784.x.

The development of change blindness: children's attentional priorities whilst 
viewing naturalistic scenes.

Fletcher-Watson S(1), Collis JM, Findlay JM, Leekam SR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Durham, Durham, UK. 
sue.fletcher-watson@newcastle.ac.uk

Change blindness describes the surprising difficulty of detecting large changes 
in visual scenes when changes occur during a visual disruption. In order to 
study the developmental course of this phenomenon, a modified version of the 
flicker paradigm, based on Rensink, O'Regan & Clark (1997), was given to three 
groups of children aged 6-12 years and to a group of adults. This paradigm 
tested the ability to detect single colour, presence/absence and location 
changes of both high and low semantic importance in a complex scene. 
Semantically important changes were detected more quickly and accurately than 
less semantically important changes, by all age groups, indicating that children 
had the same attentional priorities as adults. Older children achieved more 
efficient and accurate detection of changes than younger children and reached 
almost adult level at 10-12 years old. These improvements parallel age-related 
developments in attention and visual perception.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00784.x
PMID: 19371368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


687. Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):388-95. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00824.x.

The secret is in the sound: from unsegmented speech to lexical categories.

Christiansen MH(1), Onnis L, Hockema SA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. 
christiansen@cornell.edu

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):407-9.
    Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):409-11.

When learning language, young children are faced with many seemingly formidable 
challenges, including discovering words embedded in a continuous stream of 
sounds and determining what role these words play in syntactic constructions. We 
suggest that knowledge of phoneme distributions may play a crucial part in 
helping children segment words and determine their lexical category, and we 
propose an integrated model of how children might go from unsegmented speech to 
lexical categories. We corroborated this theoretical model using a two-stage 
computational analysis of a large corpus of English child-directed speech. 
First, we used transition probabilities between phonemes to find words in 
unsegmented speech. Second, we used distributional information about word 
edges--the beginning and ending phonemes of words--to predict whether the 
segmented words from the first stage were nouns, verbs, or something else. The 
results indicate that discovering lexical units and their associated syntactic 
category in child-directed speech is possible by attending to the statistics of 
single phoneme transitions and word-initial and final phonemes. Thus, we suggest 
that a core computational principle in language acquisition is that the same 
source of information is used to learn about different aspects of linguistic 
structure.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00824.x
PMCID: PMC2743257
PMID: 19371361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


688. Dev Sci. 2009 Mar;12(2):249-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00762.x.

Anticipatory concern: a study in autism.

Hobson JA(1), Harris R, García-Pérez R, Hobson RP.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Child Health, University College London, UK. 
j.hobson@ich.ucl.ac.uk

There has been substantial research on children's empathic responsiveness 
towards distressed people, and on the limited responsiveness of children with 
autism. To date, however, there have not been experimental studies to test how 
far children show concern towards someone who might be expected to feel badly, 
when that person has not (yet) expressed any negative feelings. We tested 
matched groups of children with autism and learning disability, and typically 
developing children of similar verbal mental age (approximately 6 years), with a 
novel procedure in which participants witnessed one person (E1) tearing the 
drawing of another (E2). In a comparison condition, a blank card was torn. In 
the torn-drawing condition, as predicted, fewer participants with autism 
orientated towards E2 with an immediate look, and as a group, they were rated as 
showing less concern for, and fewer concerned looks towards, E2. We discuss 
possible implications for theoretical perspectives on the early development of 
empathy in typically as well as atypically developing children.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00762.x
PMID: 19143798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


689. Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):175-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00755.x.

Motor and cognitive control in a normative sample of 7-year-olds.

Roebers CM(1), Kauer M.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Bern, Switzerland. roebers@psy.unibe.ch

The aim of the present study was to explore the relationship between cognitive 
and motor control by correlating individual performance on a variety of complex 
tasks in a normative sample of over 100 7-year-olds. While there are a few 
studies including children with specific developmental disorders (i.e. ADHD and 
DCD) showing that they share similar comorbid deficits, it is still unclear 
whether control processes share variance in normative samples. Results presented 
here reveal on the one hand that some aspects of cognitive and motor control are 
significantly interrelated, even when controlling for age. On the other hand, 
individuals' ability to efficiently respond to the speed and accuracy demands of 
any of the included tasks appeared to constitute an important aspect of 
executive functioning.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00755.x
PMID: 19120425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


690. Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):142-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00741.x.

Recognizing the role of perception in action at 6 months.

Luo Y(1), Johnson SC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Missouri-Columbia, USA.

The present research examined whether infants as young as 6 months of age would 
consider what objects a human agent could perceive when interpreting her actions 
on the objects. In two experiments, the infants took the agent's actions of 
repeatedly reaching for and grasping one of two possible objects as suggesting 
her preference for that object only when the agent could detect both objects, 
not when the agent's perceptual access to the second object was absent, either 
because a large screen hid the object from the agent (Experiment 1), or because 
the agent sat with her back toward the object (Experiment 2). These results 
suggest that young infants recognize the role of perception in constraining an 
agent's goal-actions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00741.x
PMID: 19120422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


691. Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):131-41. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00740.x.

At 11 months, prosody still outranks statistics.

Johnson EK(1), Seidl AH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Canada. 
elizabeth.johnson@utoronto.ca

English-learning 7.5-month-olds are heavily biased to perceive stressed 
syllables as word onsets. By 11 months, however, infants begin segmenting 
non-initially stressed words from speech. Using the same artificial language 
methodology as Johnson and Jusczyk (2001), we explored the possibility that the 
emergence of this ability is linked to a decreased reliance on prosodic cues to 
word boundaries accompanied by an increased reliance on syllable distribution 
cues. In a baseline study, where only statistical cues to word boundaries were 
present, infants exhibited a familiarity preference for statistical words. When 
conflicting stress cues were added to the speech stream, infants exhibited a 
familiarity preference for stress as opposed to statistical words. This was 
interpreted as evidence that 11-month-olds weight stress cues to word boundaries 
more heavily than statistical cues. Experiment 2 further investigated these 
results with a language containing convergent cues to word boundaries. The 
results of Experiment 2 were not conclusive. A third experiment using new 
stimuli and a different experimental design supported the conclusion that 
11-month-olds rely more heavily on prosodic than statistical cues to word 
boundaries. We conclude that the emergence of the ability to segment 
non-initially stressed words from speech is not likely to be tied to an 
increased reliance on syllable distribution cues relative to stress cues, but 
instead may emerge due to an increased reliance on and integration of a broad 
array of segmentation cues.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00740.x
PMID: 19120421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


692. Dev Sci. 2008 Nov;11(6):862-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00736.x.

The link between infant attention to goal-directed action and later theory of 
mind abilities.

Aschersleben G(1), Hofer T, Jovanovic B.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Munich, Germany. 
aschersleben@mx.uni-saarland.de

Various studies have shown that infants in their first year of life are able to 
interpret human actions as goal-directed. It is argued that this understanding 
is a precondition for understanding intentional actions and attributing mental 
states. Moreover, some authors claim that this early action understanding is a 
precursor of later Theory of Mind (ToM) development. To test this, we related 
6-month-olds' performance in an action interpretation task to their performance 
in ToM tasks at the age of 4 years. Action understanding was assessed using a 
modified version of the Woodward-paradigm (Woodward, 1999). At the age of 4 
years, the same children were tested with the German version of the ToM scale 
developed by Wellman and Liu (2004). Results revealed a correlation between 
infants' decrement of attention to goal-directed action and their ability to 
solve a false belief task at the age of 4 years with no modulation by language 
abilities. Our results indicate a link between infant attention to goal-directed 
action and later theory of mind abilities.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00736.x
PMID: 19046155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


693. Dev Sci. 2008 Nov;11(6):F40-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00752.x.

Rapid naming deficits in dyslexia: a stumbling block for the perceptual anchor 
theory of dyslexia.

Di Filippo G(1), Zoccolotti P, Ziegler JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Rome La Sapienza, Italy.

According to a recent theory of dyslexia, the perceptual anchor theory, children 
with dyslexia show deficits in classic auditory and phonological tasks not 
because they have auditory or phonological impairments but because they are 
unable to form a 'perceptual anchor' in tasks that rely on a small set of 
repeated stimuli. The theory makes the strong prediction that rapid naming 
deficits should only be present in small sets of repeated items, not in large 
sets of unrepeated items. The present research tested this prediction by 
comparing rapid naming performance of a small set of repeated items with that of 
a large set of unrepeated items. The results were unequivocal. Deficits were 
found both for small and large sets of objects and numbers. The deficit was 
actually bigger for large sets than for small sets, which is the opposite of the 
prediction made by the anchor theory. In conclusion, the perceptual anchor 
theory does not provide a satisfactory account of some of the major hallmark 
effects of developmental dyslexia.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00752.x
PMID: 19046146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


694. Dev Sci. 2008 Sep;11(5):771-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00728.x.

Children assess informant reliability using bystanders' non-verbal cues.

Fusaro M(1), Harris PL.

Author information:
(1)Harvard Graduate School of Education, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 
02138, USA.

Recent findings show that preschool children are selective with respect to whom 
they ask for information and whose claims they endorse. In particular, they 
monitor an informant's record of past accuracy or inaccuracy and use that record 
to gauge future trustworthiness. We ask if preschoolers also monitor the 
non-verbal cues of assent or dissent that bystanders display toward an 
informant's claims and use that information to gauge an informant's 
trustworthiness. In familiarization trials, 4-year-olds watched as two adult 
informants made conflicting claims regarding the name of an unfamiliar object. 
Two adult bystanders consistently signaled assent - via nods and smiles - to the 
claims of one informant, and dissent - via head shakes and frowns - from the 
claims of the other informant. When invited to endorse one of the two claims, 
4-year-olds mostly agreed with the informant who had received bystander assent. 
Thus, in the absence of background knowledge about an object's name, children 
use third-party non-verbal signals to assess the accuracy of conflicting labels. 
On subsequent test trials, the informants again made conflicting claims about 
novel object names, but in the absence of the two bystanders. Despite the lack 
of any informative bystander signals, children with more advanced understanding 
of mental states continued to display greater trust in the informant who had 
received bystander assent in the earlier trials.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00728.x
PMID: 18801133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


695. Dev Sci. 2008 Sep;11(5):750-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00725.x.

Three-year-old children can access their own memory to guide responses on a 
visual matching task.

Balcomb FK(1), Gerken L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85721, USA. 
francesb@u.arizona.edu

Many models of learning rely on accessing internal knowledge states. Yet, 
although infants and young children are recognized to be proficient learners, 
the ability to act on metacognitive information is not thought to develop until 
early school years. In the experiments reported here, 3.5-year-olds demonstrated 
memory-monitoring skills by responding on a non-verbal task originally developed 
for non-human animals, in which they had to access their knowledge states. 
Children learned a set of paired associates, and were given the option to skip 
uncertain trials on a recognition memory test. Accuracy for accepted items was 
significantly higher than for skipped on a subsequent memory task that included 
all items. Additionally, children whose memory-monitoring assessments more 
closely matched actual memory performance showed superior overall learning, 
suggesting a correlation between memory-monitoring and memory itself. The 
results suggest that children may have implicit access to internal knowledge 
states at very young ages, providing an explanation for how they are able to 
guide learning, even as infants.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00725.x
PMID: 18801131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


696. Dev Sci. 2008 Sep;11(5):692-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00718.x.

Basic number processing deficits in ADHD: a broad examination of elementary and 
complex number processing skills in 9- to 12-year-old children with ADHD-C.

Kaufmann L(1), Nuerk HC.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Department of Pediatrics IV, Division Neuropedriatrics, Innsbruck 
Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria. liane.kaufmann@i-med.ac.at

ADHD (attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder) and academic difficulties are 
frequently associated, but to date this link is poorly understood. In order to 
explore which components of number processing and calculation skills may be 
disturbed in children with ADHD we presented a series of respective tasks to 9- 
to 12-year-old children with ADHD-combined type and matched children without 
ADHD (of any type) without concomitant dyscalculia and/or dyslexia. Overall, 
group differences were not significant regarding overlearned and explicitly 
trained simple and complex calculation skills. More basic number processing 
skills are - for instance - the ability to compare one-digit numbers according 
to their magnitude (so-called magnitude comparison), to count or to transcode 
numbers, i.e. to write down an Arabic number '21' in verbal dictation. 
Significant differences favouring control children in basic number processing 
skills were obtained in a number comparison task and in a dot enumeration task. 
Importantly, our results cannot be explained by group differences regarding 
specific working memory and executive function components. Thus, number 
processing skills and in particular the processing of numerical magnitude should 
be investigated in children diagnosed with ADHD even when no comorbid learning 
disabilities are reported.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00718.x
PMID: 18801124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


697. Dev Sci. 2008 Sep;11(5):681-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00717.x.

Parts and 'holes': gaps in rational number sense among children with vs. without 
mathematical learning disabilities.

Mazzocco MM(1), Devlin KT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. mazzocco@jhu.edu

Many middle-school students struggle with decimals and fractions, even if they 
do not have a mathematical learning disability (MLD). In the present 
longitudinal study, we examined whether children with MLD have weaker rational 
number knowledge than children whose difficulty with rational numbers occurs in 
the absence of MLD. We found that children with MLD failed to accurately name 
decimals, to correctly rank order decimals and/or fractions, and to identify 
equivalent ratios (e.g. 0.5 = 1/2); they also 'identified' incorrect equivalents 
(e.g. 0.05 = 0.50). Children with low math achievement but no MLD accurately 
named decimals and identified equivalent pairs, but failed to correctly rank 
order decimals and fractions. Thus failure to accurately name decimals was an 
indicator of MLD; but accurate naming was no guarantee of rational number 
knowledge - most children who failed to correctly rank order fractions and 
decimals tests passed the naming task. Most children who failed the ranking 
tests at 6th grade also failed at 8th grade. Our findings suggest that a simple 
task involving naming and rank ordering fractions and decimals may be a useful 
addition to in-class assessments used to determine children's learning of 
rational numbers.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00717.x
PMID: 18801123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


698. Dev Sci. 2008 Sep;11(5):669-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00716.x.

Core information processing deficits in developmental dyscalculia and low 
numeracy.

Iuculano T(1), Tang J, Hall CW, Butterworth B.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, London, UK.

Erratum in
    Dev Sci. 2008 Nov;11(6):895.

There are two different conceptions of the innate basis for numerical abilities. 
On the one hand, it is claimed that infants possess a 'number module' that 
enables them to construct concepts of the exact numerosities of sets upon which 
arithmetic develops (e.g. Butterworth, 1999; Gelman & Gallistel, 1978). On the 
other hand, it has been proposed that infants are equipped only with a sense of 
approximate numerosities (e.g. Feigenson, Dehaene & Spelke, 2004), upon which 
the concepts of exact numerosities are constructed with the aid of language 
(Carey, 2004) and which forms the basis of arithmetic (Lemer, Dehaene, Spelke & 
Cohen, 2003). These competing proposals were tested by assessing whether 
performance on approximate numerosity tasks is related to performance on exact 
numerosity tasks. Moreover, performance on an analogue magnitude task was 
tested, since it has been claimed that approximate numerosities are represented 
as analogue magnitudes. In 8-9-year-olds, no relationship was found between 
exact tasks and either approximate or analogue tasks in normally achieving 
children, in children with low numeracy or in children with developmental 
dyscalculia. Low numeracy was related not to a poor grasp of exact numerosities, 
but to a poor understanding of symbolic numerals.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00716.x
PMID: 18801122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


699. Dev Sci. 2008 Sep;11(5):655-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00714.x.

Playing linear numerical board games promotes low-income children's numerical 
development.

Siegler RS(1), Ramani GB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, 
USA. rs7k@andrew.cmu.edu

Erratum in
    Dev Sci. 2008 Nov;11(6):895.

The numerical knowledge of children from low-income backgrounds trails behind 
that of peers from middle-income backgrounds even before the children enter 
school. This gap may reflect differing prior experience with informal numerical 
activities, such as numerical board games. Experiment 1 indicated that the 
numerical magnitude knowledge of preschoolers from low-income families lagged 
behind that of peers from more affluent backgrounds. Experiment 2 indicated that 
playing a simple numerical board game for four 15-minute sessions eliminated the 
differences in numerical estimation proficiency. Playing games that substituted 
colors for numbers did not have this effect. Thus, playing numerical board games 
offers an inexpensive means for reducing the gap in numerical knowledge that 
separates less and more affluent children when they begin school.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00714.x
PMID: 18801120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


700. Dev Sci. 2008 Jul;11(4):628-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00707.x.

Focusing on the relation: fewer exemplars facilitate children's initial verb 
learning and extension.

Maguire MJ(1), Hirsh-Pasek K, Golinkoff RM, Brandone AC.

Author information:
(1)School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences, University of Texas, Dallas, TX 
75235, USA. mandy.maguire@utdallas.edu

One of the most prominent theories for why children struggle to learn verbs is 
that verb learning requires the abstraction of relations between an object and 
its action (Gentner, 2003). Two hypotheses suggest how children extract 
relations to extend a novel verb: (1) seeing many different exemplars allows 
children to detect the invariant relation between actions in different contexts 
(Gentner, 2003), and (2) repetition of fewer exemplars allows children to move 
beyond the entities involved to extract the relation (Kersten & Smith, 2002). We 
tested 2 1/2- and 3-year-olds' ability to extend a novel verb after viewing the 
repetition of one novel actor compared to four different actors performing a 
novel action. Both ages were better at learning and extending a novel verb to a 
novel actor when shown only one actor rather than four different actors. These 
results indicate that during initial verb learning less information is more 
effective.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00707.x
PMID: 18576970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


701. Dev Sci. 2008 May;11(3):427-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00687.x.

Cohesion as a constraint on object persistence in infancy.

Cheries EW(1), Mitroff SR, Wynn K, Scholl BJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, USA. Cheries@wjh.harvard.edu

A critical challenge for visual perception is to represent objects as the same 
persisting individuals over time and motion. Across several areas of cognitive 
science, researchers have identified cohesion as among the most important 
theoretical principles of object persistence: An object must maintain a single 
bounded contour over time. Drawing inspiration from recent work in adult visual 
cognition, the present study tested the power of cohesion as a constraint as it 
operates early in development. In particular, we tested whether the most minimal 
cohesion violation - a single object splitting into two - would destroy infants' 
ability to represent a quantity of objects over occlusion. In a forced-choice 
crawling paradigm, 10- and 12-month-old infants witnessed crackers being 
sequentially placed into containers, and typically crawled toward the container 
with the greater cracker quantity. When one of the crackers was visibly split in 
half, however, infants failed to represent the relative quantities, despite 
controls for the overall quantities and the motions involved. This result helps 
to characterize the fidelity and specificity of cohesion as a fundamental 
principle of object persistence, suggesting that even the simplest possible 
cohesion violation can dramatically impair infants' object representations and 
influence their overt behavior.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00687.x
PMCID: PMC3665331
PMID: 18466376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


702. Dev Sci. 2008 May;11(3):396-406. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00684.x.

The metric matters: determining the extent of children's knowledge of 
morphological spelling regularities.

Deacon SH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Life Sciences Centre, Dalhousie University, 
Halifax, Canada. helene.deacon@dal.ca

All developmental research needs to carefully consider how children's knowledge 
is measured. The study of children's knowledge of spelling conventions, or the 
ways in which the English orthography encodes the roots and affixes and the 
sounds in words, is no exception. This experiment examined the extent of 7- to 
9-year-old children's knowledge of the role of root morphemes in spelling words 
across different contexts and with different units of assessment. Different 
writing contexts did not appear to affect children's performance; children were 
better able to spell the first components of two- than of one-morpheme words 
(e.g. only free in freely and freeze), both when writing whole words and their 
first sections (e.g. completing__ or __ly for freely). A second analysis 
revealed that the unit of coding can influence conclusions. Children 
demonstrated similar abilities across ages 7 to 9 when only the first segments 
of words were coded; in contrast, there was evidence of age-related differences 
when whole word spelling accuracy was assessed. In combination, these results 
suggest that children's knowledge of the principle of root consistency is 
remarkably robust to changes in writing context, but that coding is key when 
drawing conclusions. These findings remind us that the metric matters in studies 
of spelling, as in other domains, and they offer a manner to reconcile 
previously conflicting data on spelling development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00684.x
PMID: 18466373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


703. Dev Sci. 2008 May;11(3):354-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00680.x.

Intergenerational transmission of theory-of-mind.

Sabbagh MA(1), Seamans EL.

Author information:
(1)Psychology Department, Queen's University at Kingston, Ontario, Canada. 
sabbagh@post.queensu.ca

We examined whether individual differences in children's performance on a scaled 
battery of theory-of-mind tasks was predicted by parents' performance on an 
adult theory-of-mind task. Forty-six 3-year-old children and their parents 
participated in this study when children were aged 2;11 to 4;0. Thirty dyads 
returned 6 months later for a second assessment. After statistically controlling 
for relevant covariates, we detected a positive correlation between parents' and 
children's theory-of-mind scores. The correlation was significant at both time 
points, and was robust when data were aggregated across the two sessions. These 
results provide some evidence for intergenerational transmission of 
theory-of-mind abilities in a typically developing sample, and possible 
mechanisms underlying this relation are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00680.x
PMID: 18466369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


704. Dev Sci. 2008 May;11(3):339-53. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00679.x.

Cognitive flexibility in preschoolers: the role of representation activation and 
maintenance.

Chevalier N(1), Blaye A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Psychologie Cognitive, University of Provence, France. 
nicolas.chevalier@univ-provence.fr

Preschoolers' lack of cognitive flexibility has often been attributed to 
perseverative processing. This study investigates alternative potential sources 
of difficulty such as deficits in activating previously ignored information and 
in maintaining currently relevant information. In Experiment 1, a new task 
tapping attentional switching was designed to isolate the difficulty of 
overriding an initial representation, that is, perseverative processing 
('Perseveration' version), and the difficulty of activating a previously ignored 
representation, that is, activation deficit ('Activation-deficit' version). 
Three-year-olds' performance suggested that inflexibility may primarily stem 
from an activation deficit. Control experiments confirmed that the difficulty of 
the 'Activation-deficit' version could not be attributed to the effect of 
attraction to novelty. In Experiment 2, 'distraction' errors, alleged to reflect 
a failure to maintain a relevant representation, and 'perseverative' errors were 
distinguished. The results highlighted the important role of representation 
maintenance in flexibility. The present study indicates that preschoolers' lack 
of cognitive flexibility is multi-determined and prompts us to reconsider the 
role of perseveration.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00679.x
PMID: 18466368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


705. Dev Sci. 2008 Mar;11(2):209-15. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00667.x.

Confronting complexity: insights from the details of behavior over multiple 
timescales.

Samuelson LK(1), Horst JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Iowa Center for Developmental and Learning 
Sciences, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. 
larissa-samuelson@uiowa.edu

Young children tend to generalize novel names for novel solid objects by 
similarity in shape, a phenomenon dubbed 'the shape bias'. We believe that the 
critical insights needed to explain the shape bias in particular, and cognitive 
development more generally, come from Dynamic Systems Theory. We present two 
examples of recent work focusing on the real-time decision processes that 
underlie performance in the tasks used to measure the shape bias. We show how 
this work, and the dynamic systems perspective, sheds light on the controversy 
over the origins and development of the shape bias. In addition, we suggest that 
this dynamic systems perspective provides the right level for explanations of 
development because it requires a focus on the details of behavior over multiple 
timescales.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00667.x
PMID: 18333976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


706. Dev Sci. 2008 Jan;11(1):109-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00644.x.

Enhanced perceptual processing of speech in autism.

Järvinen-Pasley A(1), Wallace GL, Ramus F, Happé F, Heaton P.

Author information:
(1)Goldsmiths College, University of London, UK. pasley@salk.edu

Theories of autism have proposed that a bias towards low-level perceptual 
information, or a featural/surface-biased information-processing style, may 
compromise higher-level language processing in such individuals. Two 
experiments, utilizing linguistic stimuli with competing low-level/perceptual 
and high-level/semantic information, tested processing biases in children with 
autism and matched controls. Whereas children with autism exhibited superior 
perceptual processing of speech relative to controls, and showed no evidence of 
either a perceptual or semantic processing bias, controls showed a tendency to 
process speech semantically. The data provide partial support to the perceptual 
theories of autism. It is additionally proposed that the pattern of results may 
reflect different patterns of attentional focusing towards single or multiple 
stimulus cues in speech between children with autism and controls.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00644.x
PMID: 18171373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


707. Dev Sci. 2008 Jan;11(1):84-97. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00656.x.

Emergence of syntax: commonalities and differences across children.

Vasilyeva M(1), Waterfall H, Huttenlocher J.

Author information:
(1)Lynch School of Education, Boston College, USA. vasilyev@bc.edu

This paper presents the results of a longitudinal examination of syntactic 
skills, starting at the age of emergence of simple sentences and continuing 
through the emergence of complex sentences. We ask whether there is systematic 
variability among children from different socioeconomic backgrounds in the early 
stages of sentence production. The results suggest a different answer for simple 
versus complex sentences. We found a striking similarity across SES groups on 
the measures tapping early mastery of basic syntactic rules of simple sentences. 
At the same time, there was a significant difference between SES groups in the 
mastery of complex sentence structures. This difference emerged at the earliest 
stages of production of multi-clause sentences and persisted throughout the 
period of observation. The implications of these findings for the understanding 
of mechanisms of syntactic development are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00656.x
PMID: 18171371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


708. Dev Sci. 2008 Jan;11(1):69-75. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00642.x.

Children's subjective identification with social groups: a self-stereotyping 
approach.

Bennett M(1), Sani F.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Dundee, Scotland. M.Bennett@Dundee.ac.uk

We contend that previous work on children's identification with social groups 
has looked at the mere categorization of the self in group terms and not 
subjective identification properly conceived. Drawing upon self-categorization 
theory, the present research operationalizes identification as self-stereotyping 
(i.e. the ability to conceive of the self in group-relevant terms). Children's 
self-stereotyping was explored in two studies using gender as the relevant 
ingroup. Study 1 required 5-, 7- and 10-year-old children, on two separate 
occasions, to rate their similarity to, and difference from, same-sex peers. 
Relative to the control condition, when gender had been made salient, children 
perceived significantly greater similarity, and smaller difference, between 
themselves and same-sex peers, thus providing evidence of a capacity for 
self-stereotyping and, hence, for subjective identification with a social 
category. Similarly, Study 2 sought trait ratings of the self both when gender 
had been made salient and when it had not. Boys of all ages (though not girls) 
rated ingroup-stereotypical traits (such as bravery and strength) to be more 
characteristic of the self when gender was salient than when it was not. 
Together, these findings suggest that the capacity for subjective identification 
with social groups is present at least by the age of 5 years. Moreover, they 
demonstrate that children's self-conceptions are contextually variable.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00642.x
PMID: 18171369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


709. Dev Sci. 2008 Jan;11(1):47-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00646.x.

Developmental change in fetal response to repeated low-intensity sound.

Morokuma S(1), Doria V, Ierullo A, Kinukawa N, Fukushima K, Nakano H, 
Arulkumaran S, Papageorghiou AT.

Author information:
(1)Fetal Medicine Unit, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, St George's 
Hospital, London University, UK. morokuma@med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

The aim of this study was to investigate developmental changes in heart rate 
response to repeated low-intensity (85 dB) sound stimulation in fetuses between 
32 and 37 weeks of gestation. We measured amplitude changes in heart rate as our 
index of fetal response. At 35 to 37 weeks of gestation, the majority of fetuses 
showed a deceleratory response at the first trial. Amplitude decreased with 
further trials using the same stimulus before recovering when exposed to another 
type of stimulation. In contrast, responses in fetuses at 32 to 34 weeks of 
gestation were variable across trials and there was no recovery with exposure to 
another type of stimulation. Our results suggest that fetal habituation of 
cardiac response changes with developmental age.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00646.x
PMID: 18171366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


710. Dev Sci. 2008 Jan;11(1):23-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00661.x.

Neural substrates for processing task-irrelevant sad images in adolescents.

Wang L(1), Huettel S, De Bellis MD.

Author information:
(1)Duke-UNC Brain Imaging and Analysis Center, Duke University Medical Center, 
USA.

Neural systems related to cognitive and emotional processing were examined in 
adolescents using event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). 
Ten healthy adolescents performed an emotional oddball task. Subjects detected 
infrequent circles (targets) within a continual stream of phase-scrambled images 
(standards). Sad and neutral images were intermittently presented as 
task-irrelevant distracters (novels). As previously shown for adults, when the 
adolescents responded to the task-relevant targets, activation increased in the 
dorsal attention-executive system including the anterior middle frontal gyrus 
(aMFG), dorsal anterior cingulate (ACG), posterior cingulate (PCG), insula, and 
supramarginal gyrus (SMG). Unlike adults, however, the adolescents exhibited 
strong activation to the emotional distracter images not only in the 
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VmPFC), but also in the posterior middle frontal 
gyrus (pMFG) and in the parietal cortex. Those subjects who had stronger VmPFC 
activation to emotional distraction also had reduced activation in the aMFG 
during target detection, suggesting that emotional information may interfere 
with executive processing in these adolescents. In contrast, pMFG and PCG 
activation to emotional distracters was positively correlated with aMFG 
activation to targets, indicating a different role of these regions from the 
VmPFC. The pattern of activation to task-irrelevant emotional distraction 
suggests a possible immaturity of brain function in cognitive control over 
emotional distraction in adolescents.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00661.x
PMID: 18171363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


711. Dev Sci. 2007 Nov;10(6):892-909. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00640.x.

Comparing infants' use of featural and spatiotemporal information in an object 
individuation task using a new event-monitoring design.

Krøjgaard P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Aarhus, Aarhus C, Denmark. 
peter@psy.au.dk

Discussions have recently taken place on whether spatiotemporal information is 
more important than featural information when infants attempt to individuate 
objects. Hitherto, spatiotemporal and featural information have only been 
compared directly by using cognitively demanding 'event-mapping designs' (e.g. 
Xu & Carey, 1996), whereas the simpler event-monitoring designs (e.g. the 
'wide-screen/narrow-screen' by Wilcox and colleagues) have not been employed for 
such a comparison. The present research offers a new event-monitoring design, 
the rotating screen design, that allows for such a direct comparison. Three 
experiments in which 9.5-, 8.0-, and 6.5-month-old infants attempt to 
individuate objects by spatiotemporal and featural information are reported. The 
results showed that whereas the 9.5-month-old infants were able to individuate 
objects by spatiotemporal as well as featural information, the infants of the 
younger age groups only successfully individuated objects when provided with 
spatiotemporal information, but not with featural information.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00640.x
PMID: 17973803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


712. Dev Sci. 2007 Nov;10(6):826-35. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00615.x.

Fourteen-month-olds know what others experience only in joint engagement.

Moll H(1), Carpenter M, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Comparative Psychology, Max Planck Institute 
for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany. moll@eva.mpg.de

We investigated how 14-month-old infants know what others know. In two studies, 
an infant played with each of two objects in turn while an experimenter was 
present. Then the experimenter left the room, and the infant played with a third 
object with an assistant. The experimenter returned, faced all three objects, 
and said excitedly 'Look! Can you give it to me?' In Study 1, the experimenter 
experienced each of the first two toys in episodes of joint visual engagement 
(without manipulation) with the infant. In response to her excited request 
infants gave the experimenter the object she did not know, thus demonstrating 
that they knew which ones she knew. In Study 2, infants witnessed the 
experimenter jointly engage around each of the experienced toys with the 
assistant, from a third-person perspective. In response to her request, infants 
did not give the experimenter the object she had not experienced. In combination 
with other studies, these results suggest that to know what others have 
experienced 14-month-old infants must do more than just perceive others 
perceiving something; they must engage with them actively in joint engagement.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00615.x
PMID: 17973799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


713. Dev Sci. 2007 Nov;10(6):786-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00637.x.

Evidence for reduced domain-specificity in auditory processing in autism.

Järvinen-Pasley A(1), Heaton P.

Author information:
(1)Goldsmiths College, University of London, UK. pasley@salk.edu

Neurological and behavioral findings indicate that atypical auditory processing 
characterizes autism. The present study tested the hypothesis that auditory 
processing is less domain-specific in autism than in typical development. 
Participants with autism and controls completed a pitch sequence discrimination 
task in which same/different judgments of music and/or speech stimulus pairs 
were made. A signal detection analysis showed no difference in pitch sensitivity 
across conditions in the autism group, while controls exhibited significantly 
poorer performance in conditions incorporating speech. The results are largely 
consistent with perceptual theories of autism, which propose that a processing 
bias towards featural/low-level information characterizes the disorder, as well 
as supporting the notion that such individuals exhibit selective attention to a 
limited number of simultaneously presented cues.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00637.x
PMID: 17973796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


714. Dev Sci. 2007 Nov;10(6):741-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00609.x.

Coding location in enclosed spaces: is geometry the principle?

Huttenlocher J(1), Lourenco SF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA. 
hutt@uchicago.edu

Both animals and human toddlers can find an object in a rectangular enclosure 
after they have been disoriented. They use geometric cues (relative lengths of 
walls) to discriminate among different corners (e.g. long wall to the left, 
short to the right). It has been claimed that this ability is 'modular', i.e. 
exclusively geometric. The present study demonstrates that the ability toddlers 
exhibit is a more general one, namely, an ability to discriminate relative 
quantity. Using a square enclosure, we show that toddlers use the relative sizes 
of the figures on different walls to characterize different corners. We also 
show that they do not use simple non-relative features to distinguish different 
corners. Possible reasons for differences in the ability to use relative versus 
non-relative cues are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00609.x
PMID: 17973790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


715. Dev Sci. 2007 Nov;10(6):734-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00627.x.

Visual processing speed: effects of auditory input on visual processing.

Robinson CW(1), Sloutsky VM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Cognitive Science, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. 
robinson.777@osu.edu

The ability to process simultaneously presented auditory and visual information 
is a necessary component underlying many cognitive tasks. While this ability is 
often taken for granted, there is evidence that under many conditions auditory 
input attenuates processing of corresponding visual input. The current study 
investigated infants' processing of visual input under unimodal and cross-modal 
conditions. Results of the three reported experiments indicate that different 
auditory input had different effects on infants' processing of visual 
information. In particular, unfamiliar auditory input slowed down visual 
processing, whereas more familiar auditory input did not. These results 
elucidate mechanisms underlying auditory overshadowing in the course of 
cross-modal processing and have implications on a variety of cognitive tasks 
that depend on cross-modal processing.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00627.x
PMID: 17973789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


716. Dev Sci. 2007 Sep;10(5):654-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00607.x.

Do you believe in magic? Infants' social looking during violations of 
expectations.

Walden T(1), Kim G, McCoy C, Karrass J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Human Development, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, TN 37203, USA. tedra.walden@vanderbilt.edu

Young infants tend to look longer at physical events that have unexpected 
outcomes than those that have expected outcomes, suggesting that they have 
knowledge of physical principles such as numerosity and occlusion (Baillargeon & 
Graber, 1987; Wynn, 1992). Although infants are typically tested in the presence 
of a caregiver, the social component of violations of expectations has received 
little attention. The present study investigated social looking during 
presumably expected and unexpected cognitive/perceptual events. Two experiments 
replicated the results of well-known physical knowledge experiments on 
addition/subtraction and occlusion in 6- (Experiments 1 and 2) and 9-month-old 
infants (Experiment 1), in that infants at both ages looked longer at unexpected 
than at expected events. Furthermore, infants at both ages initiated more looks 
at their caregivers' faces during unexpected than expected events. These 
findings are interpreted as suggesting that infants as young as 6 months of age 
actively seek to embed their experiences of unexpected physical/cognitive events 
in a social context.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00607.x
PMID: 17683349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


717. Dev Sci. 2007 Sep;10(5):576-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00620.x.

Atypical long-latency auditory event-related potentials in a subset of children 
with specific language impairment.

Bishop DV(1), Hardiman M, Uwer R, von Suchodoletz W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 
dorothy.bishop@psy.ox.ac.uk

It has been proposed that specific language impairment (SLI) is the consequence 
of low-level abnormalities in auditory perception. However, studies of 
long-latency auditory ERPs in children with SLI have generated inconsistent 
findings. A possible reason for this inconsistency is the heterogeneity of SLI. 
The intraclass correlation (ICC) has been proposed as a useful statistic for 
evaluating heterogeneity because it allows one to compare an individual's 
auditory ERP with the grand average waveform from a typically developing 
reference group. We used this method to reanalyse auditory ERPs from a sample 
previously described by Uwer, Albrecht and von Suchodoletz (2002). In a subset 
of children with receptive SLI, there was less correspondence (i.e. lower ICC) 
with the normative waveform (based on the control grand average) than for 
typically developing children. This poorer correspondence was seen in responses 
to both tone and speech stimuli for the period 100-228 ms post stimulus onset. 
The effect was lateralized and seen at right- but not left-sided electrodes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00620.x
PMCID: PMC2121130
PMID: 17683344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


718. Dev Sci. 2007 Sep;10(5):538-46. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00617.x.

Developmental changes in information central to artifact representation: 
evidence from 'functional fluency' tasks.

Defeyter MA(1), Avons SE, German TC.

Author information:
(1)Division of Psychology, Northumbria University, UK.

Research suggests that while information about design is a central feature of 
older children's artifact representations it may be less important in the 
artifact representations of younger children. Three experiments explore the 
pattern of responses that 5- and 7-year-old children generate when asked to 
produce multiple uses for familiar (Experiments 1, 2) and novel (Experiment 3) 
named objects. Results showed that while older children tended to produce 
responses based on the known design function of the object, younger children's 
responses were more flexible, though still constrained by the mechanical 
structure of the object. Only when ignorant of a novel object's design function 
did older children produce more varied functions than did younger children. 
These results suggest that representations supporting object function undergo 
change across this period of development, with information about design assuming 
more importance later than it does earlier.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00617.x
PMID: 17683340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


719. Dev Sci. 2007 Sep;10(5):513-23. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00631.x.

The mirror neuron system: grasping others' actions from birth?

Lepage JF(1), Théoret H.

Author information:
(1)Département de Psychologie, Université de Montréal and Centre de Recherche de 
l'Hôpital Sainte-Justine, Montréal, Canada.

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2007 Sep;10(5):524-6.
    Dev Sci. 2007 Sep;10(5):526-9.

In the adult human brain, the presence of a system matching the observation and 
the execution of actions is well established. This mechanism is thought to rely 
primarily on the contribution of so-called 'mirror neurons', cells that are 
active when a specific gesture is executed as well as when it is seen or heard. 
Despite the wealth of evidence detailing the existence of a mirror neuron system 
(MNS) in the adult brain, little is known about its normal development. Yet, a 
better understanding of the MNS in infants would be of considerable theoretical 
and clinical interest, as dysfunctions within the MNS have been demonstrated in 
neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism spectrum disorder. Arguments in 
favor of an innate, or very early, mechanism underlying action understanding 
mainly come from studies of neonatal imitation, the existence of which has been 
questioned by some. Here, we review evidence suggesting the presence of an MNS 
in the human child, as well as work that suggests, although indirectly, the 
existence of a mechanism matching the perception and the execution of actions in 
the human newborn.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00631.x
PMID: 17683336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


720. Dev Sci. 2007 Jul;10(4):502-11. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00603.x.

The development of prudence in the face of varying future rewards.

Lemmon K(1), Moore C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Dalhousie University, Canada. moorec@dal.ca

The choice to delay gratification, opting for a greater reward later instead of 
a smaller reward now, has been used as a measure of preschoolers' ability to 
make future-oriented decisions. The present studies investigated to what extent 
these choice tasks reflect children's ability to make choices in favour of their 
future self. In Experiment 1, preschoolers were presented with choices between a 
smaller immediate reward of one sticker and larger delayed rewards varying in 
amount from two to five stickers. Whereas 3-year-olds showed no increased 
tendency to choose the delayed option as quantity increased from two to five, 
4-year-olds' future-oriented choices reflected the value of the delayed reward. 
In Experiment 2, preschoolers chose between immediate and delayed rewards that 
were equal in amount and varied between one and four stickers. Three-year-olds 
reliably chose the immediate reward and showed no differentiation among rewards, 
whereas 4-year-olds chose in a manner that suggested they were trying to satisfy 
both immediate and future desires. Together these results support the notion 
that future-oriented prudence reflects growth in concern for the future self.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00603.x
PMID: 17552939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


721. Dev Sci. 2007 Jul;10(4):481-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00601.x.

Social transmission of disinhibition in young children.

Moriguchi Y(1), Lee K, Itakura S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Graduate School of Letters, Kyoto University, 
Yoshida-honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. m-yusuke@bun.kyoto-u.ac.jp

The present study examined whether young children's behaviors in the Dimensional 
Change Card Sorting task can be influenced by their observation of another 
person performing the task. Experiment 1 showed that after children watched an 
adult sorting cards according to one rule, although the children were instructed 
to sort the cards according to a new rule, most 3-year-olds made perseverative 
errors and used the observed, old rule to sort the cards instead of the new 
rule. However, only some 4-year-olds and few 5-year-olds made the same mistake. 
Experiments 2, 3 and 4 showed that the younger children took into consideration 
social pragmatic information displayed by the adult model when deciding to use 
the old rule or the new rule. When the model appeared to know that she sorted 
the cards incorrectly (Experiments 2 and 3), or was uncertain whether she sorted 
cards correctly (Experiment 4), most 3-year-olds no longer committed 
perseverative errors. When the adult model was confident about her sorting or 
oblivious to her sorting errors, most 3-year-olds made perseverative errors. 
These results taken together suggest that social observation can lead to 
disinhibitions. In other words, disinhibition can be transmitted socially from 
one person to another.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00601.x
PMCID: PMC2570100
PMID: 17552937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


722. Dev Sci. 2007 Jul;10(4):431-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00597.x.

Heterogeneity impairs numerical matching but not numerical ordering in preschool 
children.

Cantlon J(1), Fink R, Safford K, Brannon EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology & Neuroscience, and Center for Cognitive 
Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA. jfc2@duke.edu

Do preschool children appreciate numerical value as an abstract property of a 
set of objects? We tested the influence of stimulus features such as size, 
shape, and color on preschool children's developing nonverbal numerical 
abilities. Children between 3 and 5 years of age were tested on their ability to 
estimate number when the sizes, shapes, and colors of the elements in an array 
were varied (heterogeneous condition) versus when they did not vary (homogeneous 
condition). One group of children was tested on an ordinal task in which the 
goal was to select the smaller of two arrays while another group of children was 
tested on a match-to-sample task in which the goal was to choose one of two 
visual arrays that matched the sample in number. Children performed above chance 
on both homogeneous and heterogeneous stimuli in both tasks. However, while 
children showed no impairment on heterogeneous relative to homogeneous arrays in 
the ordering task, performance was impaired by heterogeneity in the matching 
task. We suggest that nonverbal numerical abstraction occurs early in 
development, but specific task objectives may prevent children from engaging in 
numerical abstraction.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00597.x
PMID: 17552933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


723. Dev Sci. 2007 May;10(3):374-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00592.x.

Story contexts increase susceptibility to the DRM illusion in 5-year-olds.

Dewhurst SA(1), Pursglove RC, Lewis C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK. 
s.a.dewhurst@lancaster.ac.uk

False recognition in children aged 5, 8, and 11 years was investigated using the 
standard version of the Deese-Roediger-McDermott (DRM) procedure and an 
alternative version in which the DRM stimuli were embedded in stories designed 
to emphasize their overall theme. Relative to the 8- and 11-year-olds, the 
5-year-olds falsely recognized fewer critical lures when the DRM stimuli were 
presented in lists, but falsely recognized more critical lures when the stimuli 
were presented in stories. Levels of false recognition in the 8- and 
11-year-olds were not affected by study format. We argue that the story context 
enhanced the ability of the 5-year-olds to make inferences based on the theme of 
the DRM stimuli. The 5-year-olds then showed higher levels of false recognition 
than the older children owing to their inability to reject lure words consistent 
with the stories.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00592.x
PMID: 17444977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


724. Dev Sci. 2007 May;10(3):365-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00591.x.

On the relation between the acquisition of singular-plural morpho-syntax and the 
conceptual distinction between one and more than one.

Barner D(1), Thalwitz D, Wood J, Yang SJ, Carey S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 
david.barner@utoronto.ca

We investigated the relationship between the acquisition of singular-plural 
morpho-syntax and children's representation of the distinction between singular 
and plural sets. Experiment 1 tested 18-month-olds using the manual-search 
paradigm and found that, like 14-month-olds (Feigenson & Carey, 2005), they 
distinguished three objects from one but not four objects from one. Thus, they 
failed to represent four objects as 'plural' or 'more than one'. Experiment 2 
found that children continued to fail at the 1 vs. 4 manual-search task at 20 
months of age, even when told, via explicit morpho-syntactic singular-plural 
cues, that one or many balls are being hidden. However, 22- and 24-month-olds 
succeeded both with and without verbal cues. Parental report data indicated that 
most 22- and 24-month-olds, but few 20-month-olds, had begun producing plural 
nouns in their speech. Also, the success among the older children was due to 
those children who had reportedly begun producing plural nouns. We discuss a 
possible role for language acquisition in children's deployment of set-based 
quantification and the distinction between singular and plural sets.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00591.x
PMID: 17444976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


725. Dev Sci. 2007 May;10(3):307-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00585.x.

Learning overhypotheses with hierarchical Bayesian models.

Kemp C(1), Perfors A, Tenenbaum JB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. ckemp@mit.edu

Inductive learning is impossible without overhypotheses, or constraints on the 
hypotheses considered by the learner. Some of these overhypotheses must be 
innate, but we suggest that hierarchical Bayesian models can help to explain how 
the rest are acquired. To illustrate this claim, we develop models that acquire 
two kinds of overhypotheses--overhypotheses about feature variability (e.g. the 
shape bias in word learning) and overhypotheses about the grouping of categories 
into ontological kinds like objects and substances.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00585.x
PMID: 17444972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


726. Dev Sci. 2007 May;10(3):288-97. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00590.x.

Sensitivity to sampling in Bayesian word learning.

Xu F(1), Tenenbaum JB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. 
fei@psych.ubc.ca

We report a new study testing our proposal that word learning may be best 
explained as an approximate form of Bayesian inference (Xu & Tenenbaum, in 
press). Children are capable of learning word meanings across a wide range of 
communicative contexts. In different contexts, learners may encounter different 
sampling processes generating the examples of word-object pairings they observe. 
An ideal Bayesian word learner could take into account these differences in the 
sampling process and adjust his/her inferences about word meaning accordingly. 
We tested how children and adults learned words for novel object kinds in two 
sampling contexts, in which the objects to be labeled were sampled either by a 
knowledgeable teacher or by the learners themselves. Both adults and children 
generalized more conservatively in the former context; that is, they restricted 
the label to just those objects most similar to the labeled examples when the 
exemplars were chosen by a knowledgeable teacher, but not when chosen by the 
learners themselves. We discuss how this result follows naturally from a 
Bayesian analysis, but not from other statistical approaches such as associative 
word-learning models.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00590.x
PMID: 17444970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


727. Dev Sci. 2007 Mar;10(2):199-204. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00580.x.

Now I see it but you don't: 14-month-olds can represent another person's visual 
perspective.

Sodian B(1), Thoermer C, Metz U.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, München, Germany. 
sodian@edupsy.uni-muenchen.de

Twelve- and 14-month-old infants' ability to represent another person's visual 
perspective (Level-1 visual perspective taking) was studied in a looking-time 
paradigm. Fourteen-month-olds looked longer at a person reaching for and 
grasping a new object when the old goal-object was visible than when it was 
invisible to the person (but visible to the infant). These findings are 
consistent with the interpretation that infants 'rationalized' the person's 
reach for a new object when the old goal-object was out of sight. 
Twelve-month-olds did not distinguish between test conditions. The present 
findings are consistent with recent research on infants' developing 
understanding of seeing.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00580.x
PMID: 17286844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


728. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):126-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00574.x.

'Like me': a foundation for social cognition.

Meltzoff AN(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA 98195, USA. meltzoff@u.washington.edu

Infants represent the acts of others and their own acts in commensurate terms. 
They can recognize cross-modal equivalences between acts they see others perform 
and their own felt bodily movements. This recognition of self-other equivalences 
in action gives rise to interpreting others as having similar psychological 
states such as perceptions and emotions. The 'like me' nature of others is the 
starting point for social cognition, not its culmination.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00574.x
PMCID: PMC1852489
PMID: 17181710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


729. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):121-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00573.x.

Shared intentionality.

Tomasello M(1), Carpenter M.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany. 
tomas@eva.mpg.de

We argue for the importance of processes of shared intentionality in children's 
early cognitive development. We look briefly at four important social-cognitive 
skills and how they are transformed by shared intentionality. In each case, we 
look first at a kind of individualistic version of the skill -- as exemplified 
most clearly in the behavior of chimpanzees -- and then at a version based on 
shared intentionality -- as exemplified most clearly in the behavior of human 1- 
and 2-year-olds. We thus see the following transformations: gaze following into 
joint attention, social manipulation into cooperative communication, group 
activity into collaboration, and social learning into instructed learning. We 
conclude by highlighting the role that shared intentionality may play in 
integrating more biologically based and more culturally based theories of human 
development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00573.x
PMID: 17181709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


730. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):69-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00566.x.

Dynamic instabilities as mechanisms for emergence.

Schöner G(1), Dineva E.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Neuroinformatik, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany. 
gregor.schoener@neuroinformatik.ruhr-uni-bochum.de

That competences may emerge given appropriate environmental and behavioral 
context is a long-standing theme in developmental research. Work in the motor 
domain, but also in cognitive development, has made it possible to transform 
this idea into a mechanistic account closely linked to empirical evidence. In 
dynamic systems thinking, such capacities as keeping a motor goal in mind, 
remembering a location, or resisting a motor habit, are all understood in terms 
of the generation of stable patterns of neuronal activation. These may be 
input-driven, but also be stabilized by interactions within neuronal 
representations. A key theoretical insight is that whether a particular pattern 
of activation is stable or not is not determined by any single factor, learning 
process, or structural parameter. Instead, ongoing activity, recent activation 
history, current input, all may affect when a particular dynamic regime is 
reachable. In spite of such broad interdependence, sharp transitions may 
characterize the onset of a skill in any given context. Dynamic instabilities 
are the mechanistic basis for this phenomenon and thus form the basis for 
understanding development in terms of emergence. We exemplify the concepts of 
instability and emergence around the phenomenon of infant perseverative reaching 
and discuss implications for identifying key markers of development and their 
link to neuronal processes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00566.x
PMID: 17181702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


731. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):61-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00565.x.

The dynamic lift of developmental process.

Smith LB(1), Breazeal C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 
Bloomington, IN 47405, USA. smith4@indiana.edu

What are the essential properties of human intelligence, currently unparalleled 
in its power relative to other biological forms and relative to artificial forms 
of intelligence? We suggest that answering this question depends critically on 
understanding developmental process. This paper considers three principles 
potentially essential to building human-like intelligence: the heterogeneity of 
the component processes, the embedding of development in a social world, and 
developmental processes that change the cognitive system as a function of the 
history of soft-assemblies of these heterogeneous processes in specific tasks. 
The paper uses examples from human development and from developmental robotics 
to show how these processes also may underlie biological intelligence and enable 
us to generate more advanced forms of artificial intelligence.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00565.x
PMID: 17181701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


732. Dev Sci. 2006 Nov;9(6):604-15. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00539.x.

Intersensory redundancy educates selective attention in bobwhite quail embryos.

Lickliter R(1), Bahrick LE, Markham RG.

Author information:
(1)Infant Development Research Center, Department of Psychology, Florida 
International University, Miami, FL 33199, USA. licklite@fiu.edu

We assessed whether exposure to amodal properties in bimodal stimulation (e.g. 
rhythm, rate, duration) could educate attention to amodal properties in 
subsequent unimodal stimulation during prenatal development. Bobwhite quail 
embryos were exposed to an individual bobwhite maternal call under several 
experimental and control conditions during the day prior to hatching. 
Experimental groups received redundant auditory and visual exposure to the 
temporal features of an individual maternal call followed by unimodal auditory 
exposure to the same call immediately or after a 2-hr or 4-hr delay. Control 
groups received (1) the same exposure but in the reverse sequence (unimodal --> 
redundant bimodal), (2) asynchronous bimodal --> unimodal, (3) only unimodal 
exposure, or (4) only bimodal exposure. All experimental groups showed a 
significant preference for the familiar maternal call over a novel maternal call 
when tested 2 days after hatching, whereas none of the control groups showed a 
significant preference for the familiar call. These results indicate that 
intersensory redundancy can direct attention to amodal properties in bimodal 
stimulation and educate attention to the same amodal properties in subsequent 
unimodal stimulation where no intersensory redundancy is available.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00539.x
PMCID: PMC1813927
PMID: 17059458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


733. Dev Sci. 2006 Nov;9(6):565-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00534.x.

Infant word segmentation revisited: edge alignment facilitates target 
extraction.

Seidl A(1), Johnson EK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Speech, Language and Hearing Sciences, Purdue University, W. 
Lafayette, IN 47906, USA. aseidl@purdue.edu

In a landmark study, Jusczyk and Aslin (1995) demonstrated that English-learning 
infants are able to segment words from continuous speech at 7.5 months of age. 
In the current study, we explored the possibility that infants segment words 
from the edges of utterances more readily than the middle of utterances. The 
same procedure was used as in Jusczyk and Aslin (1995); however, our stimuli 
were controlled for target word location and infants were given a shorter 
familiarization time to avoid ceiling effects. Infants were familiarized to one 
word that always occurred at the edge of an utterance (sentence-initial position 
for half of the infants and sentence-final position for the other half) and one 
word that always occurred in sentence-medial position. Our results demonstrate 
that infants segment words from the edges of an utterance more readily than from 
the middle of an utterance. In addition, infants segment words from 
utterance-final position just as readily as they segment words from 
utterance-initial position. Possible explanations for these results, as well as 
their implications for current models of the development of word segmentation, 
are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00534.x
PMID: 17059453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


734. Dev Sci. 2006 Nov;9(6):551-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00532.x.

Physiological and behavioral parameters of infants' categorization: changes in 
heart rate and duration of examining across trials.

Elsner B(1), Pauen S, Jeschonek S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Physiological Psychology, University of 
Heidelberg, Germany. elsner@psychologie.uni-heidelberg.de

This report investigates the relations between duration of examining and heart 
rate (HR) across several trials of an object-examination task. A total of N= 20 
11-month-olds were familiarized with a sequence of 10 different exemplars from 
the same global category (animals or furniture) before they received an exemplar 
from the contrasting category at test. Consistent with previous findings, HR was 
lower during states of focused attention (i.e. examining) than during states of 
casual attention (i.e. looking) or non-looking. Over the familiarization trials, 
examining stayed about the same, while mean HR increased. At test, examining 
increased and mean HR decreased, indicating that infants focused their attention 
on the out-of-category object. Psychophysiological and behavioral measures of 
attention were systematically related over trials, suggesting that heart rate 
provides a suitable objective measure to study infants' categorization 
performance in object-examination tasks.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00532.x
PMID: 17059451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


735. Dev Sci. 2006 Sep;9(5):530-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00520.x.

Developmental changes in perceptions of attractiveness: a role of experience?

Cooper PA(1), Geldart SS, Mondloch CJ, Maurer D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Neuroscience & Behaviour, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

In three experiments, we traced the development of the adult pattern of 
judgments of attractiveness for faces that have been altered to have internal 
features in low, average, or high positions. Twelve-year-olds and adults 
demonstrated identical patterns of results: they rated faces with features in an 
average location as significantly more attractive than faces with either low or 
high features. Although both 4-year-olds and 9-year-olds rated faces with high 
features as least attractive, unlike adults and 12-year-olds, they rated faces 
with low and average features as equally attractive. Three-year-olds with high 
levels of peer interaction, but not those with low levels of peer interaction, 
chose faces with low features as significantly more attractive than those with 
high-placed features, possibly as a result of their increased experience with 
the proportions of the faces of peers. Overall, the pattern of results is 
consistent with the hypothesis that experience influences perceptions of 
attractiveness, with the proportions of the faces participants see in their 
everyday lives influencing their perceptions of attractiveness.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00520.x
PMID: 16911455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


736. Dev Sci. 2006 Sep;9(5):490-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00516.x.

The development of change detection.

Shore DI(1), Burack JA, Miller D, Joseph S, Enns JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Neuroscience & Behaviour, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. dshore@mcmaster.ca

Changes to a scene often go unnoticed if the objects of the change are 
unattended, making change detection an index of where attention is focused 
during scene perception. We measured change detection in school-age children and 
young adults by repeatedly alternating two versions of an image. To provide an 
age-fair assessment we used a bimanual choice rather than open-ended verbal 
responses. The difference in detection speed and accuracy between 50-ms versus 
250-ms blank screens between views indexed change detection in short-term visual 
memory independent of sensory and response processes. Younger children were 
significantly less efficient than older participants, especially when an object 
changed color or had a part deleted. Changes in object orientation were detected 
more readily. These results point to important differences in the perceptual 
reality of younger and older children.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00516.x
PMID: 16911451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


737. Dev Sci. 2006 Sep;9(5):482-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00515.x.

A new method for calibrating perceptual salience across dimensions in infants: 
the case of color vs. luminance.

Kaldy Z(1), Blaser EA, Leslie AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts Boston, MA 02125, USA. 
zsuzsa.kaldy@umb.edu

We report a new method for calibrating differences in perceptual salience across 
feature dimensions, in infants. The problem of inter-dimensional salience arises 
in many areas of infant studies, but a general method for addressing the problem 
has not previously been described. Our method is based on a preferential looking 
paradigm, adapted to determine the relative salience of two stimuli. We report 
here on the case of stimuli differing in color and luminance, though the method 
has wider potential. We were able to determine on a psychophysical curve the 
point at which a color contrast was equally salient to infants as a given 
luminance contrast. We then used these calibrated, 'iso-salient' stimuli in an 
object memory study. Results showed that 6.5-month-old infants noticed a color, 
but not a luminance, change while tracking an occluded object. Our method should 
have numerous applications in the study of bottom-up effects on infant attention 
and visual working memory.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00515.x
PMID: 16911450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


738. Dev Sci. 2006 Sep;9(5):429-36. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00509.x.

Becoming literate in different languages: similar problems, different solutions.

Ziegler JC(1), Goswami U.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Psychologie Cognitive, CNRS and University of Provence, 
France.

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2006 Sep;9(5):437-9; discussion 451-3.
    Dev Sci. 2006 Sep;9(5):439-40; discussion 451-3.
    Dev Sci. 2006 Sep;9(5):441-2; discussion 451-3.
    Dev Sci. 2006 Sep;9(5):443-4; discussion 451-3.
    Dev Sci. 2006 Sep;9(5):445-7; discussion 451-3.
    Dev Sci. 2006 Sep;9(5):447-8; discussion 451-3.
    Dev Sci. 2006 Sep;9(5):448-50; discussion 451-3.

The teaching of reading in different languages should be informed by an 
effective evidence base. Although most children will eventually become 
competent, indeed skilled, readers of their languages, the pre-reading (e.g. 
phonological awareness) and language skills that they bring to school may differ 
in systematic ways for different language environments. A thorough understanding 
of potential differences is required if literacy teaching is to be optimized in 
different languages. Here we propose a theoretical framework based on a 
psycholinguistic grain size approach to guide the collection of evidence in 
different countries. We argue that the development of reading depends on 
children's phonological awareness in all languages studied to date. However, we 
propose that because languages vary in the consistency with which phonology is 
represented in orthography, there are developmental differences in the grain 
size of lexical representations, and accompanying differences in developmental 
reading strategies across orthographies.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00509.x
PMID: 16911438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


739. Dev Sci. 2006 Jul;9(4):400-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00505.x.

Human behaviour and development under high-altitude conditions.

Virués-Ortega J(1), Garrido E, Javierre C, Kloezeman KC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Personality, Assessment and Treatment, Universidad de Granada, 
Spain. virues@ugr.es

Although we are far from a universally accepted pattern of impaired function at 
altitude, there is evidence indicating motor, perceptual, memory and behavioural 
deficits in adults. Even relatively low altitudes (2500 m) may delay reaction 
time, and impair motor function. Extreme altitude exposure (>5000 m) may result 
in more pronounced impairment that can persist after returning to the lowlands. 
Research into the effects of altitude exposure earlier in development is lacking 
by comparison. Un-acclimatized children can suffer from acute mountain sickness, 
and, in native populations born at altitude, subtle cognitive and behavioural 
deficits suggest incomplete adaptation to hypoxia. The study of neurobehavioural 
functioning at altitude may provide important information about the effects of 
clinical hypoxia on the human brain and behavioural development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00505.x
PMID: 16764613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


740. Dev Sci. 2006 Jul;9(4):388-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00504.x.

Neurocognitive dysfunction in children with sleep disorders.

Kheirandish L(1), Gozal D.

Author information:
(1)Child and Youth Project and Division of Paediatric Sleep Medicine, Department 
of Paediatrics, University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY 
40202, USA.

It is well known that adults with sleep disturbances frequently exhibit a wide 
range of neurocognitive decrements, and that these deficits are potentially 
reversible with effective treatment. However, the consequences of respiratory 
sleep disturbances on neurocognitive function in children have only recently 
been evaluated, and suggest a strong causal association between the episodic 
hypoxia and sleep fragmentation that characterize the disease and the emergence 
of reduced memory, attention and intelligence as well as a link to problematic 
and hyperactive behaviours and mood disturbances. This article takes a critical 
look at the current literature on these issues, reviews the major findings and 
discusses such findings in conjunction with those derived from pertinent animal 
models.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00504.x
PMID: 16764612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


741. Dev Sci. 2006 Jul;9(4):368-78. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00502.x.

Intellectual development of infants, children and adolescents with congenital 
heart disease.

Wray J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Trust, UK. 
j.wray@rbh.nthames.nhs.uk

Cardiac disease is the most common congenital defect in children, affecting 
between 3 and 10 in every 1000 live births. While significant advances in 
medical and surgical management have resulted in increasing numbers of 
survivors, it is also recognized that there is a growing population of children 
living with neurological impairment and lowered intellectual function. The 
aetiology of such impairment is multi-factorial and hypoxia is one of the 
factors involved. This article provides an overview of the effects of hypoxia on 
the intellectual development of infants, children and adolescents with 
congenital heart disease.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00502.x
PMID: 16764610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


742. Dev Sci. 2006 May;9(3):323-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00496.x.

Choose and choose again: appearance-reality errors, pragmatics and logical 
ability.

Deák GO(1), Enright B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Science, University of California, San Diego, 92093, 
USA. deak@cogsci.ucsd.edu

In the Appearance/Reality (AR) task some 3- and 4-year-old children make 
perseverative errors: they choose the same word for the appearance and the 
function of a deceptive object. Are these errors specific to the AR task, or 
signs of a general question-answering problem? Preschoolers completed five 
tasks: AR; simple successive forced-choice question pairs (QP); flexible naming 
of objects (FN); working memory (WM) span; and indeterminacy detection (ID). AR 
errors correlated with QP errors. Insensitivity to indeterminacy predicted 
perseveration in both tasks. Neither WM span nor flexible naming predicted other 
measures. Age predicted sensitivity to indeterminacy. These findings suggest 
that AR tests measure a pragmatic understanding; specifically, different 
questions about a topic usually call for different answers. This understanding 
is related to the ability to detect indeterminacy of each question in a series. 
AR errors are unrelated to the ability to represent an object as belonging to 
multiple categories, to working memory span, or to inhibiting previously 
activated words.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00496.x
PMID: 16669804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


743. Dev Sci. 2006 May;9(3):316-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00495.x.

The shape of boubas: sound-shape correspondences in toddlers and adults.

Maurer D(1), Pathman T, Mondloch CJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Neuroscience & Behaviour, McMaster University, 
Canada. maurer@mcmaster.ca

A striking demonstration that sound-object correspondences are not completely 
arbitrary is that adults map nonsense words with rounded vowels (e.g. bouba) to 
rounded shapes and nonsense words with unrounded vowels (e.g. kiki) to angular 
shapes (Köhler, 1947; Ramachandran & Hubbard, 2001). Here we tested the 
bouba/kiki phenomenon in 2.5-year-old children and a control group of adults (n 
=20 per age), using four pairs of rounded versus pointed shapes and four 
contrasting pairs of nonsense words differing in vowel sound. Overall, 
participants at both ages matched words with rounded vowels to the rounder 
shapes and words with unrounded vowels to the pointed shapes (both ps < .0005), 
with no significant difference between the two ages (p > .10). Such naturally 
biased correspondences between sound and shape may influence the development of 
language.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00495.x
PMID: 16669803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


744. Dev Sci. 2006 May;9(3):309-15. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00494.x.

Crossmodal integration of emotional information from face and voice in the 
infant brain.

Grossmann T(1), Striano T, Friederici AD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and 
Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany. t.grossmann@bbk.ac.uk

We examined 7-month-old infants' processing of emotionally congruent and 
incongruent face-voice pairs using ERP measures. Infants watched facial 
expressions (happy or angry) and, after a delay of 400 ms, heard a word spoken 
with a prosody that was either emotionally congruent or incongruent with the 
face being presented. The ERP data revealed that the amplitude of a negative 
component and a subsequent positive component in infants' ERPs varied as a 
function of crossmodal emotional congruity. An emotionally incongruent prosody 
elicited a larger negative component in infants' ERPs than did an emotionally 
congruent prosody. Conversely, the amplitude of infants' positive component was 
larger to emotionally congruent than to incongruent prosody. Previous work has 
shown that an attenuation of the negative component and an enhancement of the 
later positive component in infants' ERPs reflect the recognition of an item. 
Thus, the current findings suggest that 7-month-olds integrate emotional 
information across modalities and recognize common affect in the face and voice.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00494.x
PMID: 16669802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


745. Dev Sci. 2006 May;9(3):303-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00493.x.

The effect of divided attention on inhibiting the gravity error.

Hood BM(1), Wilson A, Dyson S.

Author information:
(1)Bristol Cognitive Development Centre, University of Bristol, UK. 
bruce.hood@bristol.ac.uk

Children who could overcome the gravity error on Hood's (1995) tubes task were 
tested in a condition where they had to monitor two falling balls. This 
condition significantly impaired search performance with the majority of 
mistakes being gravity errors. In a second experiment, the effect of monitoring 
two balls was compared in the tubes task and a spatial transposition task not 
involving gravity. Again, monitoring two objects produced impaired search 
performance in the gravity task but not in the spatial transposition task. These 
findings support the view that divided attention disrupts the ability to 
exercise inhibitory control over the gravity error and that the performance drop 
on this task is not due to the additional task demands incurred by divided 
attention.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00493.x
PMID: 16669801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


746. Dev Sci. 2006 May;9(3):295-302. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00492.x.

When the social mirror breaks: deficits in automatic, but not voluntary, mimicry 
of emotional facial expressions in autism.

McIntosh DN(1), Reichmann-Decker A, Winkielman P, Wilbarger JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Denver, CO 80208, USA. 
dmcintos@du.edu

Humans, infants and adults alike, automatically mimic a variety of behaviors. 
Such mimicry facilitates social functioning, including establishment of 
interpersonal rapport and understanding of other minds. This fundamental social 
process may thus be impaired in disorders such as autism characterized by 
socio-emotional and communicative deficits. We examined automatic and voluntary 
mimicry of emotional facial expression among adolescents and adults with 
autistic spectrum disorders (ASD) and a typical sample matched on age, gender 
and verbal intelligence. Participants viewed pictures of happy and angry 
expressions while the activity over their cheek and brow muscle region was 
monitored with electromyography (EMG). ASD participants did not automatically 
mimic facial expressions whereas the typically developing participants did. 
However, both groups showed evidence of successful voluntary mimicry. The data 
suggest that autism is associated with an impairment of a basic automatic 
social-emotion process. Results have implications for understanding typical and 
atypical social cognition.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00492.x
PMID: 16669800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


747. Dev Sci. 2006 May;9(3):270-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00489.x.

Are preschoolers sensitive to configural information in faces?

Pellicano E(1), Rhodes G, Peters M.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Western Australia. 
liz.pellicano@psych.ox.ac.uk

Several researchers have proposed that developmental improvements in children's 
face recognition abilities might reflect an increasing reliance on configural 
information (i.e. spatial relations between features) in faces (Carey & Diamond, 
1994; Mondloch, Le Grand & Maurer, 2002). We investigated 4- and 5-year-olds' 
use of configural information for upright and inverted faces using Tanaka and 
Sengco's (1997) configural change paradigm. Participants saw a photograph of a 
child's face (e.g. Luke). Memory for features (e.g. Luke's mouth) was then 
tested in a face with the same configuration as the study face (e.g. Luke's 
face), in a face with a novel spatial configuration (e.g. Luke's face with the 
eyes shifted further apart), and presented on their own (e.g. Luke's mouth 
alone). We found that preschoolers and adults recognized target features from 
upright faces better when tested in the context of a face with the same 
configuration as the study face, than when they were embedded in a face with a 
new spatial configuration or when they were presented in isolation. This effect 
was lost when faces were inverted. The results suggest that adult-like styles of 
face processing are present from 4 years of age.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00489.x
PMID: 16669797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


748. Dev Sci. 2006 Mar;9(2):189-206. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00479.x.

The eyes have it: visual pop-out in infants and adults.

Adler SA(1), Orprecio J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, York University, Canada. adler@yorku.ca

Visual search studies with adults have shown that stimuli that contain a unique 
perceptual feature pop out from dissimilar distractors and are unaffected by the 
number of distractors. Studies with very young infants have suggested that they 
too might exhibit pop-out. However, infant studies have used paradigms in which 
pop-out is measured in seconds or minutes, whereas in adults pop-out occurs in 
milliseconds. In addition, with the previous infant paradigms the effects from 
higher cognitive processes such as memory cannot be separated from pop-out and 
selective attention. Consequently, whether infants exhibit the phenomenon of 
pop-out and have selective attention mechanisms as found in adults is not clear. 
This study was an initial attempt to design a paradigm that would provide a 
comparable measure between infants and adults, thereby allowing a more accurate 
determination of the developmental course of pop-out and selective attention 
mechanisms. To this end, we measured 3-month-olds' and adults' saccade latencies 
to visual arrays that contained either a + among Ls (target-present) or all Ls 
(target-absent) with set sizes of 1, 3, 5 or 8 items. In Experiment 1, infants' 
saccade latencies remained unchanged in the target-present conditions as set 
size increased, whereas their saccade latencies increased linearly in the 
target-absent conditions as set size increased. In Experiment 2, adults' saccade 
latencies in the target-present and target-absent conditions showed the same 
pattern as the infants. The only difference between the infants and adults was 
that the infants' saccade latencies were slower in every condition. These 
results indicate that infants do exhibit pop-out on a millisecond scale, that it 
is unaffected by the number of distractors, and likely have similar functioning 
selective attention mechanisms. Moreover, the results indicate that eye movement 
latencies are a more comparable and accurate measure for assessing the 
phenomenon of pop-out and underlying attentional mechanisms in infants.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00479.x
PMID: 16472320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


749. Dev Sci. 2006 Mar;9(2):166-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00476.x.

Syllogistic reasoning and belief-bias inhibition in school children: evidence 
from a negative priming paradigm.

Moutier S(1), Plagne-Cayeux S, Melot AM, Houdé O.

Author information:
(1)UMR 6194, CNRS, CEA, Universities of Paris-5 and Caen, Institute of 
Psychology, Sorbonne, France. sylvain.moutier@paris5.sirbonne.fr

Research on deductive reasoning in adolescents and adults has shown that errors 
in deductive logic are not necessarily due to a lack of logical ability but can 
stem from an executive failure to inhibit biases. Few studies have examined this 
dissociation in children. Here, we used a negative priming paradigm with 64 
children (8-10 years old) to test the role of cognitive inhibition in syllogisms 
with belief-bias effects. On trials where negative priming was predicted, 
results were as follows: For the first syllogism (A), the strategy 
'unbelievable-equals-invalid' had to be inhibited. The logic of the syllogism 
led to affirming a conclusion inconsistent with one's knowledge of the world, 
such as 'All elephants are light.' For the second syllogism (B), one's 
real-world knowledge and the syllogism's logic were congruent but the latter 
required affirming exactly what had been inhibited for A (i.e. that elephants 
are heavy). A negative priming effect on the A-B sequence was reflected in a 
significant drop in reasoning performance on B. This supports the idea that 
during cognitive development, inhibitory control is required for success on 
syllogisms where beliefs and logic interfere.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00476.x
PMID: 16472317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


750. Dev Sci. 2006 Mar;9(2):158-65. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00475.x.

Learning words: children disregard some pragmatic information that conflicts 
with mutual exclusivity.

Jaswal VK(1), Hansen MB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Virginia 22904, USA. 
jaswal@virginia.edu

Children tend to infer that when a speaker uses a new label, the label refers to 
an unlabeled object rather than one they already know the label for. Does this 
inference reflect a default assumption that words are mutually exclusive? Or 
does it instead reflect the result of a pragmatic reasoning process about what 
the speaker intended? In two studies, we distinguish between these 
possibilities. Preschoolers watched as a speaker pointed toward (Study 1) or 
looked at (Study 2) a familiar object while requesting the referent for a new 
word (e.g. 'Can you give me the blicket?'). In both studies, despite the 
speaker's unambiguous behavioral cue indicating an intent to refer to a familiar 
object, children inferred that the novel label referred to an unfamiliar object. 
These results suggest that children expect words to be mutually exclusive even 
when a speaker provides some kinds of pragmatic evidence to the contrary.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00475.x
PMID: 16472316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


751. Dev Sci. 2006 Mar;9(2):125-47. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00470.x.

Gaze following: why (not) learn it?

Triesch J(1), Teuscher C, Deák GO, Carlson E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Science, University of California, San Diego, CA, 
USA. triesch@cogsci.ucsd.edu

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2006 Mar;9(2):148-9;discussion 156-7.
    Dev Sci. 2006 Mar;9(2):149-50; discussion 156-7.

We propose a computational model of the emergence of gaze following skills in 
infant-caregiver interactions. The model is based on the idea that infants learn 
that monitoring their caregiver's direction of gaze allows them to predict the 
locations of interesting objects or events in their environment (Moore & Corkum, 
1994). Elaborating on this theory, we demonstrate that a specific Basic Set of 
structures and mechanisms is sufficient for gaze following to emerge. This Basic 
Set includes the infant's perceptual skills and preferences, habituation and 
reward-driven learning, and a structured social environment featuring a 
caregiver who tends to look at things the infant will find interesting. We 
review evidence that all elements of the Basic Set are established well before 
the relevant gaze following skills emerge. We evaluate the model in a series of 
simulations and show that it can account for typical development. We also 
demonstrate that plausible alterations of model parameters, motivated by 
findings on two different developmental disorders - autism and Williams syndrome 
- produce delays or deficits in the emergence of gaze following. The model makes 
a number of testable predictions. In addition, it opens a new perspective for 
theorizing about cross-species differences in gaze following.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00470.x
PMID: 16472311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


752. Dev Sci. 2003 Jun;6(3):346-59. doi: 10.1111/1467-7687.00289.

The influence of language on theory of mind: a training study.

Hale CM(1), Tager-Flusberg H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, USA.

This study investigated the role of language in the development of theory of 
mind. It was hypothesized that the acquisition of the syntactic and semantic 
properties of sentential complements would facilitate the development of a 
representational theory of mind. Sixty preschoolers who failed false belief and 
sentential complement pretests were randomly assigned to training on false 
belief, sentential complements, or relative clauses (as a control group). All 
the children were post-tested on a set of different theory of mind tasks, 
sentential complements and relative clauses. The main findings were that the 
group trained on sentential complements not only acquired the linguistic 
knowledge fostered by the training, but also significantly increased their 
scores on a range of theory of mind tasks. In contrast, false belief training 
only led to improved theory of mind scores but had no influence on language. The 
control group, trained on relative clauses, showed no improvement on theory of 
mind posttests. These findings are taken as evidence that the acquisition of 
sentential complements contributes to the development of theory of mind in 
preschoolers.

DOI: 10.1111/1467-7687.00289
PMCID: PMC1350918
PMID: 16467908


753. Dev Sci. 2006 Jan;9(1):108-23. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00467.x.

The development of landmark and beacon use in young children: evidence from a 
touchscreen search task.

Sutton JE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Western Ontario, Canada. 
jsutton7@uwo.ca

Children ages 2, 3 and 4 years participated in a novel hide-and-seek search task 
presented on a touchscreen monitor. On beacon trials, the target hiding place 
could be located using a beacon cue, but on landmark trials, searching required 
the use of a nearby landmark cue. In Experiment 1, 2-year-olds performed less 
accurately than older children on landmark trials but performed equivalently on 
beacon trials. In Experiment 2, the number of items on the screen was reduced 
and 2-year-olds' performance improved. Use of the landmark transformation 
technique in Experiment 3 revealed that older children formed a more precise 
landmark-target spatial relationship than 2-year-olds. Experiment 4 showed that 
the transformation itself was not responsible for the youngest participants' 
decreased accuracy in Experiment 3. Overall, beacons were utilized effectively 
by all participants, but the use of landmark cues is refined between the ages of 
2 and 4.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00467.x
PMID: 16445400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


754. Dev Sci. 2006 Jan;9(1):76-96. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00465.x.

Germs and angels: the role of testimony in young children's ontology.

Harris PL(1), Pasquini ES, Duke S, Asscher JJ, Pons F.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Education, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 
02138, USA. Paul_Harris@gse.harvard.edu

In three experiments, children's reliance on other people's testimony as 
compared to their own, first-hand experience was assessed in the domain of 
ontology. Children ranging from 4 to 8 years were asked to judge whether five 
different types of entity exist: real entities (e.g. cats, trees) whose 
existence is evident to everyone; scientific entities (e.g. germs, oxygen) that 
are normally invisible but whose existence is generally presupposed in everyday 
discourse; endorsed beings (e.g. the Tooth Fairy, Santa Claus) whose existence 
is typically endorsed in discourse with young children; equivocal beings (e.g. 
monsters, witches) whose existence is not typically endorsed in discourse with 
young children; and impossible entities (e.g. flying pigs, barking cats) that 
nobody believes in. Children make a broad dichotomy between entities and beings 
that they claim to exist (real entities; scientific entities; and endorsed 
beings) and those whose existence they deny (equivocal beings and impossible 
entities). They also make a more fine-grained distinction among the invisible 
entities that they claim to exist. Thus, they assert the existence of scientific 
entities such as germs with more confidence than that of endorsed beings such as 
Santa Claus. The findings confirm that children's ontological claims extend 
beyond their first-hand encounters with instances of a given category. Children 
readily believe in entities that they cannot see for themselves but have been 
told about. Their confidence in the existence of those entities appears to vary 
with the pattern of testimony that they receive.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00465.x
PMID: 16445398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


755. Dev Sci. 2006 Jan;9(1):63-75. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00464.x.

How fantasy benefits young children's understanding of pretense.

Sobel DM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive and Linguistic Sciences, Brown University, USA. 
sobel@cog.brown.edu

Sobel and Lillard (2001) demonstrated that 4-year-olds' understanding of the 
role that the mind plays in pretending improved when children were asked 
questions in a fantasy context. The present study investigated whether this 
fantasy effect was motivated by children recognizing that fantasy contains 
violations of real-world causal structure. In Experiment 1, 4-year-olds were 
shown a fantasy character engaged in ordinary actions or actions that violated 
causal knowledge. Children were more likely to say that a troll doll who was 
acting like but ignorant of the character was not pretending to be that 
character when read the violation story. Experiment 2 suggested that this 
difference was not caused by a greater interest in the violation story. 
Experiment 3 demonstrated a similar difference for characters engaged in social 
and functional violations that were possible in the real world. These data are 
consistent with the hypothesis that preschoolers use actions and appearance more 
than mental states to make judgments about pretense, but that those judgments 
can be influenced by the context in which the questions are presented.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00464.x
PMID: 16445397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


756. Dev Sci. 2005 Nov;8(6):605-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00452.x.

A longitudinal investigation of visual event-related potentials in the first 
year of life.

Webb SJ(1), Long JD, Nelson CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington, 
USA. sjwebb@u.washington.edu

The goal of the current study was to assess general maturational changes in the 
ERP in the same sample of infants from 4 to 12 months of age. All participants 
were tested in two experimental manipulations at each age: a test of facial 
recognition and one of object recognition. Two sets of analyses were undertaken. 
First, growth curve modeling with mixed models was used to examine trajectories 
of development and possible differences in trajectories based on recognition 
memory (novel versus familiar) and/or stimulus-specific memory (face versus 
object recognition). Our results suggest that the Pb, Nc and Slow Wave 
components change significantly in terms of amplitude and latency over the first 
year of life. Pb amplitude showed a significant non-linear increase over time, 
whereas Pb latency showed a significant linear decrease over time with a plateau 
beginning at 10 months. Nc amplitude showed a significant linear decrease over 
time (i.e. a stronger negative value), whereas Nc latency showed a significant 
linear decrease over time, with a plateau beginning at 8 months. Second, to 
relate our findings to those reported in the literature, we examined the effects 
of memory and stimulus and their combination. Differences between recognition 
memory and stimulus specific memory were found in the responses to familiar and 
novel faces and objects for all three components, although the pattern differed 
across the five ages. These results have implications for future studies that 
involve the recording of the visual ERP, and point to the advantages of growth 
curve modeling in examining longitudinal data to account for non-linear 
development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00452.x
PMID: 16246251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


757. Dev Sci. 2005 Nov;8(6):583-94. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00449.x.

What young children do and do not know about the spelling of inflections and 
derivations.

Deacon SH(1), Bryant P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, UK. 
helene.deacon@dal.ca

Morphemes have a powerful impact on the spellings of words in English. We report 
on two experiments examining young children's knowledge of the effect of suffix 
morphemes on spelling. In Experiment 1, 5- to 8-year-olds demonstrated awareness 
of the role of inflections, but not derivations in spelling. Experiment 2 
examined whether children might show an understanding of the impact of 
derivations on spelling when they are provided with the specific spelling 
pattern. There was support for this idea; 7- to 10-year-old children took 
advantage of the derivations that were given to spell other derivations, but not 
the endings of control words. The results of these experiments suggest that 
young children are aware of the role that suffixes play in determining spelling, 
but that there are limits, such as those imposed by spelling difficulty, that 
constrain the execution of this knowledge. These findings provide new insights 
into current theoretical debates on spelling development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00449.x
PMID: 16246249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


758. Dev Sci. 2005 Nov;8(6):567-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00448.x.

Evidence against a maximum response model of exogenous visual orienting during 
early infancy and support for a dimensional switching model.

Dannemiller JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin - Madison, USA. 
dannemil@rice.edu

Very young infants orient overtly with eye and head movements to salient events 
in their visual environments, but those events rarely occur in the absence of 
competing visual stimuli. Two different models of how this kind of orienting is 
related to number and distribution of elements in the stimulus field were tested 
with infants across the age range from 2 to 5 months in four experiments. A set 
size manipulation in Experiments 1-3 produced data that were mostly inconsistent 
with the Maximum Response model proposed by Dannemiller (1998), especially at 
ages over 3 months. Experiment 4 produced data from 3.5-month-olds that were 
consistent with an alternative Dimensional Switching model that assumed that 
there was switching across trials in the stimulus dimension that drove 
orienting. This Dimensional Switching model can explain the small to nonexistent 
set size effects observed in the first three experiments as well as data from 
previous experiments using this paradigm. Factors that could produce this kind 
of dimensional switching over time were considered and other implications of 
this model for understanding the development of overt visual orienting were 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00448.x
PMID: 16246248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


759. Dev Sci. 2005 Sep;8(5):420-3. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00430.x.

Language-specific effects on number computation in toddlers.

Hodent C(1), Bryant P, Houdé O.

Author information:
(1)UMR 6194, CNRS, CEA, Universities of Caen and Paris 5 (Sorbonne), Institute 
of Psychology, France.

A fundamental question in developmental science is how brains with and without 
language compute numbers. Measuring young children's verbal reactions in France 
(Paris) and in England (Oxford), here we show that, although there is a general 
arithmetic ability for small numbers that is shared by monkeys and preverbal 
infants, the development of such initial knowledge in humans follows specific 
performance patterns, depending on what language the children speak.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00430.x
PMID: 16048514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


760. Dev Sci. 2005 Sep;8(5):409-19. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00429.x.

Auditory-visual intermodal matching of small numerosities in 6-month-old 
infants.

Kobayashi T(1), Hiraki K, Hasegawa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive and Behavioral Science, The University of Tokyo, 
Japan. tessei@cslab.kecl.ntt.co.jp

Recent studies have reported that preverbal infants are able to discriminate 
between numerosities of sets presented within a particular modality. There is 
still debate, however, over whether they are able to perform intermodal 
numerosity matching, i.e. to relate numerosities of sets presented with 
different sensory modalities. The present study investigated auditory-visual 
intermodal matching of small numerosities in infancy by using a 
violation-of-expectation paradigm. After being familiarized with events of a few 
objects impacting a surface successively, 6-month-old infants were alternatively 
presented with two and three tones while the movement of each object remained 
hidden behind an opaque screen. The screen was then removed to reveal either two 
or three objects. Results showed that the infants looked significantly longer at 
the numerically nonequivalent events (the three-tone/two-object and the 
two-tone/three-object events) than at the numerically equivalent events (the 
two-tone/two-object and the three-tone/three-object events) irrespective of the 
rate or duration of auditory tones presented. These findings suggest that 
infants are capable of performing intermodal matching of small numerosities and 
that they might possess abstract representations of numerosity beyond sensory 
modalities.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00429.x
PMID: 16048513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


761. Dev Sci. 2005 Sep;8(5):402-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00428.x.

Motor processes in children's imagery: the case of mental rotation of hands.

Funk M(1), Brugger P, Wilkening F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Zurich, Switzerland. 
marion.funk@usz.ch

In a mental rotation task, children 5 and 6 years of age and adults had to 
decide as quickly as possible if a photograph of a hand showed a left or a right 
limb. The visually presented hands were left and right hands in palm or in back 
view, presented in four different angles of rotation. Participants had to give 
their responses with their own hands either in a regular, palms-down posture or 
in an inverted, palms-up posture. For both children and adults, variation of the 
posture of their own hand had a significant effect. Reaction times were longer 
the more awkward it was to bring their own hand into the position shown in the 
stimulus photograph. These results, together with other converging evidence, 
strongly suggest that young children's kinetic imagery is guided by motor 
processes, even more so than adults'.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00428.x
PMID: 16048512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


762. Dev Sci. 2005 Jul;8(4):360-71. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00424.x.

Factors responsible for performance on the day-night task: response set or 
semantics?

Simpson A(1), Riggs KJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, London Metropolitan University, Old Castle Street, 
London E1 7NT, UK.

In a recent study Diamond, Kirkham and Amso (2002) obtained evidence consistent 
with the claim that the day-night task requires inhibition because the picture 
and its corresponding conflicting response are semantically related. In their 
study children responded more accurately in a dog-pig condition (see /day 
picture/ say "dog"; see /night picture/ say "pig") than the standard day-night 
condition (see /day picture/ say "night"; see /night picture/ say "day"). 
However, there is another effect that may have made the day-night condition 
harder than the dog-pig condition: the response set effect. In the day-night 
condition the names of the two stimuli ("day" and "night") and the two 
corresponding conflicting responses ("night" and "day") are from the same 
response set: both "day" and "night". In the dog-pig condition the names of the 
stimuli ("day", "night") and the corresponding responses ("dog", "pig") are from 
a different response set. In two experiments (Experiment 1 with 4-year-olds (n = 
25); Experiment 2 with , 4-, 5-, 7- and 11-year-olds (n = 81)) children were 
tested on four experimental conditions that enabled the effects of semantics and 
response set to be separated. Overall, our data suggest that response set is a 
major factor in creating the inhibitory demands of the day-night task in 
children of all ages. Results are discussed in relation to other inhibitory 
tasks.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00424.x
PMID: 15985070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


763. Dev Sci. 2005 Jul;8(4):352-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00423.x.

Maternal gestures with 20-month-old infants in two contexts.

O'Neill M(1), Bard KA, Linnell M, Fluck M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Portsmouth, UK. 
maria.l.oneill@gmail.com

Speech directed towards young children ("motherese") is subject to consistent 
systematic modifications. Recent research suggests that gesture directed towards 
young children is similarly modified (gesturese). It has been suggested that 
gesturese supports speech, therefore scaffolding communicative development (the 
facilitative interactional theory). Alternatively, maternal gestural 
modification may be a consequence of the semantic simplicity of interaction with 
infants (the interactional artefact theory). The gesture patterns of 12 English 
mothers were observed with their 20-month-old infants while engaged in two 
tasks, free play and a counting task, designed to differentially tap into 
scaffolding. Gestures accounted for 29% of total maternal communicative 
behaviour. English mothers employed mainly concrete deictic gestures (e.g. 
pointing) that supported speech by disambiguating and emphasizing the verbal 
utterance. Maternal gesture rate and informational gesture-speech relationship 
were consistent across tasks, supporting the interactional artefact theory. This 
distinctive pattern of gesture use for the English mothers was similar to that 
reported for American and Italian mothers, providing support for universality. 
Child-directed gestures are not redundant in relation to child-directed speech 
but rather both are used by mothers to support their communicative acts with 
infants.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00423.x
PMID: 15985069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


764. Dev Sci. 2005 Jul;8(4):344-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00422.x.

Embedded figures detection in autism and typical development: preliminary 
evidence of a double dissociation in relationships with visual search.

Jarrold C(1), Gilchrist ID, Bender A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Bristol, 8 Woodland 
Road, Bristol BS8 1TN, UK. C.Jarrold@bristol.ac.uk

Individuals with autism show relatively strong performance on tasks that require 
them to identify the constituent parts of a visual stimulus. This is assumed to 
be the result of a bias towards processing the local elements in a display that 
follows from a weakened ability to integrate information at the global level. 
The results of the current study showed that, among children with autism, 
ability to locate a figure embedded in a larger stimulus was only related to 
performance on visual search trials where the target was identified by a unique 
perceptual feature. In contrast, control children's embedded figures performance 
was specifically related to their performance on visual search trials where the 
target was defined by a conjunction of features. This double dissociation 
suggests that enhanced performance on perceptual tasks by children with autism 
is not simply a consequence of a quantitative difference in ability to engage in 
global processing.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00422.x
PMID: 15985068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


765. Dev Sci. 2005 Jul;8(4):299-314. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00416.x.

Infants' symbolic comprehension of actions modeled with toy replicas.

Johnson KE(1), Younger BA, Furrer SD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, 
LD 124, 402 N. Blackford Street, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. kjohnso@iupui.edu

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2005 Jul;8(4):315-6; discussion 317-8.

While very young children's understanding of objects as symbols for other 
entities has been the focus of much investigation, very little is known 
concerning the emergence of comprehension for symbolic relations among actions 
modeled with toy replicas and their real counterparts. We used videotaped 
depictions of real actions in a preferential looking task to assess toddlers' 
ability to comprehend such connections for action categories aligned with 
familiar object concepts. Across two experiments, 16- and 18-month-olds provided 
no evidence of understanding such relations, even when action categories were 
highlighted with verbal prompts. Among 24- and 26-month-olds, comprehension of 
relations between certain actions modeled with toys and videos of their 
real-world counterparts began to emerge, independent of expressive vocabulary 
size. Implications of our results for theoretical conclusions drawn from use of 
the generalized imitation procedure to study early conceptual development are 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00416.x
PMID: 15985062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


766. Dev Sci. 2005 Mar;8(2):141-50. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00401.x.

Varieties of preschool hyperactivity: multiple pathways from risk to disorder.

Sonuga-Barke EJ(1), Auerbach J, Campbell SB, Daley D, Thompson M.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK. 
ejb3@soton.ac.uk

In this paper we examine the characteristics of preschool attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) from both mental disorder and developmental 
psychopathology points of view. The equivalence of preschool and school-aged 
hyperactivity as a behavioral dimension is highlighted together with the 
potential value of extending the use of the ADHD diagnostic category to the 
preschool period where these behaviours take an extreme and impairing form 
(assuming age appropriate diagnostic items and thresholds can be developed). At 
the same time, the importance of identifying pathways between risk and later 
ADHD is emphasized. Developmental discontinuity and heterogeneity are identified 
as major characteristics of these pathways. We argue that models that 
distinguish among different developmental types of early-emerging problems are 
needed. An illustrative taxonomy of four developmental pathways implicating 
preschool hyperactivity is presented to provide a framework for future research.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00401.x
PMID: 15720372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


767. Dev Sci. 2005 Mar;8(2):132-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00400.x.

Towards an understanding of unique and shared pathways in the 
psychopathophysiology of ADHD.

Banaschewski T(1), Hollis C, Oosterlaan J, Roeyers H, Rubia K, Willcutt E, 
Taylor E.

Author information:
(1)Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, University of Göttingen, von-Siebold-Str. 5, 
D-37075 Göttingen, Germany. tbanasc@gwdg.de

Most attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) research has compared cases 
with unaffected controls. This has led to many associations, but uncertainties 
about their specificity to ADHD in contrast with other disorders. We present a 
selective review of research, comparing ADHD with other disorders in 
neuropsychological, neurobiological and genetic correlates. So far, a specific 
pathophysiological pathway has not been identified. ADHD is probably not 
specifically associated with executive function deficits. It is possible, but 
not yet established, that ADHD symptoms may be more specifically associated with 
motivational abnormalities, motor organization and time perception. Recent 
findings indicating common genetic liabilities of ADHD and other conditions 
raise questions about diagnostic boundaries. In future research, the delineation 
of the pathophysiological mechanisms of ADHD needs to match cognitive, imaging 
and genetic techniques to the challenge of defining more homogenous clinical 
groups; multi-site collaborative projects are needed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00400.x
PMID: 15720371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


768. Dev Sci. 2005 Mar;8(2):105-14. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00397.x.

Whither causal models in the neuroscience of ADHD?

Coghill D(1), Nigg J, Rothenberger A, Sonuga-Barke E, Tannock R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Dundee, Ninewella Hospital and 
Medical School, Dundee, DD1 9SY, Scotland, UK. david.coghill@tpct.scot.nhs.uk

In this paper we examine the current status of the science of ADHD from a 
theoretical point of view. While the field has reached the point at which a 
number of causal models have been proposed, it remains some distance away from 
demonstrating the viability of such models empirically. We identify a number of 
existing barriers and make proposals as to the best way for these to be overcome 
in future studies. These include the need to work across multiple levels of 
analysis in multidisciplinary teams; the need to recognize the existence of, and 
then model, causal heterogeneity; the need to integrate environmental and social 
processes into models of genetic and neurobiological influence; and the need to 
model developmental processes in a dynamic fashion. Such a model of science, 
although difficult to achieve, has the potential to provide the sort of 
framework for programmatic model-based research required if the power and 
sophistication of new neuroscience technologies are to be effectively exploited.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00397.x
PMID: 15720368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


769. Dev Sci. 2005 Jan;8(1):26-35. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00390.x.

The role of speech rhythm in language discrimination: further tests with a 
non-human primate.

Tincoff R(1), Hauser M, Tsao F, Spaepen G, Ramus F, Mehler J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Harvard University, 33 Kirkland Street, 9th Floor, 
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. tincoff@wjh.harvard.edu

Human newborns discriminate languages from different rhythmic classes, fail to 
discriminate languages from the same rhythmic class, and fail to discriminate 
languages when the utterances are played backwards. Recent evidence showing that 
cotton-top tamarins discriminate Dutch from Japanese, but not when utterances 
are played backwards, is compatible with the hypothesis that rhythm 
discrimination is based on a general perceptual mechanism inherited from a 
primate ancestor. The present study further explores the rhythm hypothesis for 
language discrimination by testing languages from the same and different 
rhythmic class. We find that tamarins discriminate Polish from Japanese 
(different rhythmic classes), fail to discriminate English and Dutch (same 
rhythmic class), and fail to discriminate backwards utterances from different 
and same rhythmic classes. These results provide further evidence that language 
discrimination in tamarins is facilitated by rhythmic differences between 
languages, and suggest that, in humans, this mechanism is unlikely to have 
evolved specifically for language.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00390.x
PMID: 15647064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


770. Dev Sci. 2004 Nov;7(5):581-98. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00382.x.

Learning during the newborn's first meal: special resistance to retroactive 
interference.

Cheslock SJ(1), Sanders SK, Spear NE.

Author information:
(1)Center for Developmental Psychobiology, Department of Psychology, Binghamton 
University, New York 13902-6000, USA.

At their first postnatal meal, 3-hour-old rats learned an association between an 
odor and a sweet or bitter taste. Retention after a long interval or after 
associative interference was compared to that of 1-day-old rats. Despite 
equivalent and negligible effect of the long retention interval, contrary to 
infantile amnesia, newborns differed strikingly from 1-day-olds in 
susceptibility to associative interference. When lemon odor predicted saccharin 
in the first episode but quinine in the second, 1-day-olds had strong 
retroactive interference, but the newborn's first memory was unaffected by the 
second. The results were identical when the first memory was a lemon-quinine 
association and the second a lemon-saccharin association. It is uncertain 
whether this special robustness of memories associated with the first postnatal 
meal is best understood in terms of cognitive primacy or neurochemical and 
physiological consequences of the birth process.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00382.x
PMID: 15603291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


771. Dev Sci. 2004 Nov;7(5):543-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00378.x.

Two- and three-year-olds infer and reason about design intentions in order to 
categorize broken objects.

Nelson DG(1), Holt MB, Egan LC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Swarthmore College, PA 19081-1390, USA. 
dkemler1@swarthmore.edu

In naming artifacts, do young children infer and reason about the intended 
functions of the objects? Participants between the ages of 2 and 4 years were 
shown two kinds of objects derived from familiar categories. One kind was 
damaged so as to undermine its usual function. The other kind was also 
dysfunctional, but made so by adding features that appeared to be intentional. 
Evidence that 2-, 3- and 4-year-olds were more likely to apprehend the broken 
objects than the intentionally dysfunctional objects as members of the familiar 
lexical categories favors the conclusion that, in naming, children may 
spontaneously infer and reason about design intentions from an early age. This 
is the first evidence that 2- and 3-year-olds not only take design intentions 
into account in object categorization, but that they do so even without explicit 
mention of the objects' accidental or intentional histories. The results cast 
doubt on a proposal that young children's lexical categorization is based on 
automatic, non-deliberative processes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00378.x
PMID: 15603287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


772. Dev Sci. 2004 Nov;7(5):518-26. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00375.x.

The role of joint attention in the development of infants' play with objects.

Bigelow AE(1), MacLean K, Proctor J.

Author information:
(1)Psychology Department, St Francis Xavier University, Antigonish, Nova Scotia, 
Canada. abigelow@stfx.ca

Year-old infants' play was scored within and outside joint attention with mother 
and when alone for four levels of maturity: stereotypical, inappropriate 
relational, appropriate relational, functional. Maternal sensitivity within 
joint attention was rated on two measures: following infants' interests and 
scaffolding infants' activities. Infants' play was more advanced with mother 
than when alone. With mother, infants had more functional and appropriate 
relational play within joint attention and more stereotypical play outside joint 
attention, indicating more advanced play within joint attention and more 
immature play outside joint attention. Functional play within joint attention, 
but not outside joint attention, correlated with functional play when alone. 
Mothers' ability to scaffold infants' activities within joint attention may be 
particularly facilitative to infants' advanced play.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00375.x
PMID: 15603284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


773. Dev Sci. 2004 Jun;7(3):308-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00350.x.

Culture and children's cosmology.

Siegal M(1), Butterworth G, Newcombe PA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Sheffield, UK. 
M.Siegal@Sheffield.ac.uk

In this investigation, we examined children's knowledge of cosmology in relation 
to the shape of the earth and the day-night cycle. Using explicit questioning 
involving a choice of alternative answers and 3D models, we carried out a 
comparison of children aged 4-9 years living in Australia and England Though 
Australia and England have a close cultural affinity, there are differences in 
children's early exposure to cosmological concepts. Australian children who have 
early instruction in this domain were nearly always significantly in advance of 
their English counterparts. In general, they most often produced responses 
compatible with a conception of a round earth on which people can live all over 
without falling off. We consider coherence and fragmentation in children's 
knowledge in terms of the timing of culturally transmitted information, and in 
relation to questioning methods used in previous research that may have 
underestimated children's competence.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00350.x
PMID: 15595372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


774. Dev Sci. 2004 Jun;7(3):289-96. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00348.x.

Long-term memory for music: infants remember tempo and timbre.

Trainor LJ(1), Wu L, Tsang CD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada. 
LJT@mcmaster.ca

We show that infants' long-term memory representations for melodies are not just 
reduced to the structural features of relative pitches and durations, but 
contain surface or performance tempo- and timbre-specific information. Using a 
head turn preference procedure, we found that after a one week exposure to an 
old English folk song, infants preferred to listen to a novel folk song, 
indicating that they remembered the familiarized melody. However, if the tempo 
(25% faster or slower) or instrument timbre (harp vs. piano) of the familiarized 
melody was changed at test, infants showed no preference, indicating that they 
remembered the specific tempo and timbre of the melodies. The results are 
consistent with an exemplar-based model of memory in infancy rather than one in 
which structural features are extracted and performance features forgotten.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00348.x
PMID: 15595370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


775. Dev Sci. 2004 Sep;7(4):469-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00367.x.

Effects of repetition and configural changes on the development of face 
recognition processes.

Itier RJ(1), Taylor MJ.

Author information:
(1)The Rotman Research Institute, BayCrest Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 
ritier@rotman-baycrest.on.ca

We investigated the effect of repetition on recognition of upright, inverted and 
contrast-reversed target faces in children from 8 to 15 years when engaged in a 
learning phase/test phase paradigm with target and distractor faces. Early (P1, 
N170) and late ERP components were analysed Children across age groups performed 
equally well, and were better at recognizing upright faces. However, teenagers 
and adults were equally accurate for all three face types. The 
neurophysiological responses to upright, inverted and negative faces matured 
until adulthood and showed different effects at different ages. P1 and N170 
components were affected by face type at all ages, suggesting early configural 
disruption on encoding processes regardless of age. Frontal ERPs reflected the 
difficulty of processing these stimuli. Distinct repetition effects were seen at 
frontal, temporal frontal and parietal sites, suggesting differential 
involvement of these brain regions underlying working memory and recognition 
processes. Thus, a learning phase was sufficient (a) for 8-year-olds to perform 
as accurately as 15-year-olds and (b) to eliminate face type effects in 
teenagers and adults, but not in younger children.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00367.x
PMID: 15484595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


776. Dev Sci. 2004 Sep;7(4):456-68. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00366.x.

A visit from the Candy Witch: factors influencing young children's belief in a 
novel fantastical being.

Woolley JD(1), Boerger EA, Markman AB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712, USA. 
woolley@psy.utexas.edu

Factors hypothesized to affect beliefs in fantastical beings were examined by 
introducing children to a novel fantastical entity, the Candy Witch. Results 
revealed that among older preschoolers, children who were visited by the Candy 
Witch exhibited stronger beliefs in the Candy Witch than did those who were not. 
Among children who were visited, older children had stronger beliefs than did 
younger children. Among children who were not visited, those with a high Fantasy 
Orientation believed more strongly than did those with a low Fantasy 
Orientation. Belief remained high one year later. At both time points, the 
number of other fantastical beings in which a child believed was significantly 
related to belief in the Candy Witch.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00366.x
PMID: 15484594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


777. Dev Sci. 2004 Sep;7(4):443-55. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00365.x.

Switching between spatial stimulus-response mappings: a developmental study of 
cognitive flexibility.

Crone EA(1), Ridderinkhof KR, Worm M, Somsen RJ, van der Molen MW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Psychology, University of Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. eacrone@ucdavis.edu

Four different age groups (8-9-year-olds, 11-12-year-olds, 13-15-year-olds and 
young adults) performed a spatial rule-switch task in which the sorting rule had 
to be detected on the basis of feedback or on the basis of switch cues. 
Performance errors were examined on the basis of a recently introduced method of 
error scoring for the Wisconsin Card Sorting Task (WCST; Barcelo & Knight, 
2002). This method allowed us to differentiate between errors due to 
failure-to-maintain-set (distraction errors) and errors due to 
failure-to-switch-set (perseverative errors). The anticipated age differences in 
performance errors were most pronounced for perseverative errors between 8-9 
years and 11-12 years, but for distraction errors adult levels were not reached 
until 13-15 years. These findings were interpreted to support the notion that 
set switching and set maintenance follow distinct developmental trajectories.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00365.x
PMID: 15484593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


778. Dev Sci. 2004 Feb;7(1):88-102. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00325.x.

The impact of child maltreatment on expressive syntax at 60 months.

Eigsti IM(1), Cicchetti D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Social Sciences in Psychology, University of 
Rochester, USA. ie2004@columbia.edu

Although child maltreatment has often been described as leading to language 
deficits, the few well-controlled investigations of language acquisition in 
maltreated children have focused on language content rather than form, or have 
used qualitative rather than quantitative measures. This study examines 
syntactic complexity in 19 maltreated and 14 nonmaltreated preschool-aged 
children. Mother-child dyads participated in play sessions that were transcribed 
and scored for the presence of morphosyntactic forms in child speech and for 
specific sentence constructions in maternal speech. Findings indicated that 
child maltreatment was associated with language delay in both vocabulary and 
production of syntactic structures. There were also qualitative differences in 
characteristics of maternal utterances between maltreating and comparison 
groups. Because maltreatment initially occurred before age 2, this study 
highlights the long-lasting negative influence of maltreatment on language 
development and also provides the first demonstration of child language delays 
and differences in maternal speech within a single maltreatment sample.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00325.x
PMID: 15323121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


779. Dev Sci. 2004 Feb;7(1):25-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00319.x.

Task orientation, parental warmth and SES account for a significant proportion 
of the shared environmental variance in general cognitive ability in early 
childhood: evidence from a twin study.

Petrill SA(1), Deater-Deckard K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biobehavioral Health, Center for Developmental and Health 
Genetics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park 16802, USA. 
sap27@psu.edu

Prior research suggests shared environmental influences on cognitive performance 
are important in early childhood. However, few studies have attempted to 
identify the factors comprising this shared environmental variance. To address 
this issue, we examined the covariance between task orientation, parental 
warmth, socioeconomic status and general cognitive ability in a British twin 
study of 125 pairs of identical and same-sex fraternal twins. Task orientation 
correlated r =.41 with general cognitive ability Bivariate genetic analyses 
suggested that this correlation was mediated by shared environmental influences. 
Additional analyses suggested that SES and parental warmth mediated about 
two-thirds of the shared environmental covariance between task engagement and 
cognitive skills.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00319.x
PMID: 15323115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


780. Dev Sci. 2004 Apr;7(2):167-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00335.x.

'Core knowledges': a dissociation between spatiotemporal knowledge and 
contact-mechanics in a non-human primate?

Santos LR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Harvard University, USA. laurie.santos@yale.edu

Human toddlers demonstrate striking failures when searching for hidden objects 
that interact with other objects, yet successfully locate hidden objects that do 
not undergo mechanical interactions. This pattern hints at a developmental 
dissociation between contact-mechanical and spatiotemporal knowledge. Recent 
studies suggest that adult non-human primates may exhibit a similar 
dissociation. Here, I provide the first direct test of this dissociation using a 
search paradigm with adult rhesus monkeys. Subjects watched as a plum rolled 
behind one of two opaque barriers. In Experiment 1, subjects had to locate the 
plum based on the position of a wall that blocked the plum's trajectory. 
Subjects searched incorrectly, apparently neglecting information about the 
location of the wall. However, subjects searched correctly in Experiments 2-4 
when they were given spatiotemporal information about the plum's movement. 
Results indicate that adult monkeys use spatiotemporal information, but not 
contact-mechanical information, to locate hidden objects. This dissociation 
between contact-mechanical and spatiotemporal knowledge is discussed in light of 
developmental theories of core knowledge and the literature on object-based 
attention in human adults.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00335.x
PMID: 15320376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


781. Dev Sci. 2020 Oct 22:e13052. doi: 10.1111/desc.13052. Online ahead of print.

Parental hostility predicts reduced cortical thickness in males.

Chad-Friedman E(1), Botdorf M(1), Riggins T(1), Dougherty LR(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Maryland College Park, College Park, MD, USA.

Although impacts of negative parenting on children's brain development are 
well-documented, little is known about how these associations may differ for 
males and females in childhood. We examined interactions between child sex and 
early and concurrent parental hostility on children's cortical thickness and 
surface area. Participants included 63 children (50.8% female) assessed during 
early childhood (Wave 1: M age = 4.23 years, SD = 0.84) and again three years 
later (Wave 2: M age = 7.19 years, SD = 0.89) using an observational 
parent-child interaction task. At Wave 2, children completed a structural MRI 
scan. Analyses focused on regions of interest. After correcting for multiple 
comparisons, Wave 1 parental hostility predicted males' reduced thickness in 
middle frontal and fusiform cortices, and Wave 2 parental hostility was 
concurrently associated with males' reduced thickness in the middle frontal 
cortex. Interactions between sex and parenting on children's surface area did 
not survive corrections for multiple comparisons. Our findings provide support 
for a male-specific neural vulnerability of hostile parenting across 
development. Results have important implications for uncovering neural pathways 
to sex-differences in psychopathology, learning, and cognitive disabilities.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13052
PMID: 33091205


782. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13041. doi: 10.1111/desc.13041. Epub 2020 Oct 28.

Functional connectivity in the developing language network in 4-year-old 
children predicts future reading ability.

Jasińska KK(1)(2), Shuai L(2), Lau ANL(2)(3), Frost S(2), Landi N(2)(3)(4), Pugh 
KR(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Applied Psychology and Human Development, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(2)Haskins Laboratories, New Haven, CT, USA.
(3)University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA.
(4)Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.

Understanding how pre-literate children's language abilities and neural function 
relate to future reading ability is important for identifying children who may 
be at-risk for reading problems. Pre-literate children are already proficient 
users of spoken language and their developing brain networks for language become 
highly overlapping with brain networks that emerge during literacy acquisition. 
In the present longitudinal study, we examined language abilities, and neural 
activation and connectivity within the language network in pre-literate children 
(mean age = 4.2 years). We tested how language abilities, brain activation, and 
connectivity predict children's reading abilities 1 year later (mean 
age = 5.2 years). At Time 1, children (n = 37) participated in a functional near 
infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) experiment of speech processing (listening to 
words and pseudowords) and completed a standardized battery of language and 
cognitive assessments. At Time 2, children (n = 28) completed standardized 
reading assessments. Using psychophysiological interaction (PPI) analyses, we 
observed significant connectivity between the left IFG and right STG in 
pre-literate children, which was modulated by task (i.e., listening to words). 
Neural activation in left IFG and STG and increased task-modulated connectivity 
between the left IFG and right STG was predictive of multiple reading outcomes. 
Increased connectivity was associated later with increased reading ability.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13041
PMID: 33032375


783. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13035. doi: 10.1111/desc.13035. Epub 2020 Sep 17.

Slow wave sleep in naps supports episodic memories in early childhood.

Lokhandwala S(1)(2), Spencer RMC(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, University of Massachusetts, 
Amherst, MA, USA.
(2)Developmental Science Program, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA.
(3)Neuroscience & Behavior Program, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, 
USA.
(4)Institute for Applied Life Sciences, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 
MA, USA.

Naps have been shown to benefit visuospatial learning in early childhood. This 
benefit has been associated with sleep spindles during the nap. However, whether 
young children's naps and their accompanying physiology benefit other forms of 
declarative learning is unknown. Using a novel storybook task, we found 
performance in children (N = 22, mean age = 51.23 months) was better following a 
nap compared to performance following an equivalent interval spent awake. 
Moreover, performance remained better the following day if a nap followed 
learning. Change in post-nap performance was positively associated with the 
amount of time spent in slow wave sleep during the nap. This suggests that slow 
wave sleep in naps may support episodic memory consolidation in early childhood. 
Taken in conjunction with prior work, these results suggest that multiple 
features of brain physiology during naps may contribute to declarative memory 
processing in early childhood.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13035
PMID: 32881204


784. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13034. doi: 10.1111/desc.13034. Epub 2020 Oct 2.

Early word-learning skills: A missing link in understanding the vocabulary gap?

Shavlik M(1), Davis-Kean PE(2), Schwab JF(3), Booth AE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Human Development, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, TN, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Socioeconomic status (SES) has been repeatedly linked to the developmental 
trajectory of vocabulary acquisition in young children. However, the nature of 
this relationship remains underspecified. In particular, despite an extensive 
literature documenting young children's reliance on a host of skills and 
strategies to learn new words, little attention has been paid to whether and how 
these skills relate to measures of SES and vocabulary acquisition. To evaluate 
these relationships, we conducted two studies. In Study 1, 205 2.5- to 
3.5-year-old children from widely varying socioeconomic backgrounds were tested 
on a broad range of word-learning skills that tap their ability to resolve cases 
of ambiguous reference and to extend words appropriately. Children's executive 
functioning and phonological memory skills were also assessed. In Study 2, 77 of 
those children returned for a follow-up session several months later, at which 
time two additional measures of vocabulary were obtained. Using Structural 
Equation Modeling (SEM) and multivariate regression, we provide evidence of the 
mediating role of word-learning skills on the relationship between SES and 
vocabulary skill over the course of early development.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13034
PMID: 32881178


785. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13030. doi: 10.1111/desc.13030. Epub 2020 Sep 4.

18-month-olds fail to use recent experience to infer the syntactic category of 
novel words.

Havron N(1), Babineau M(1), Christophe A(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et Psycholinguistique, DEC-ENS/EHESS/CNRS, 
Ecole Normale Supérieure - PSL University, Paris, France.

Infants are able to use the contexts in which familiar words appear to guide 
their inferences about the syntactic category of novel words (e.g. 'This is a' + 
'dax' -> dax = object). The current study examined whether 18-month-old infants 
can rapidly adapt these expectations by tracking the distribution of syntactic 
structures in their input. In French, la petite can be followed by both nouns 
(la petite balle, 'the little ball') and verbs (la petite mange, 'the little one 
is eating'). Infants were habituated to a novel word, as well as to familiar 
nouns or verbs (depending on the experimental group), all appearing after la 
petite. The familiar words served to create an expectation that la petite would 
be followed by either nouns or verbs. If infants can utilize their knowledge of 
a few frequent words to adjust their expectations, then they could use this 
information to infer the syntactic category of a novel word - and be surprised 
when the novel word is used in a context that is incongruent with their 
expectations. However, infants in both groups did not show a difference between 
noun and verb test trials. Thus, no evidence for adaptation-based learning was 
found. We propose that infants have to entertain strong expectations about 
syntactic contexts before they can adapt these expectations based on recent 
input.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13030
PMID: 32783246


786. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13026. doi: 10.1111/desc.13026. Epub 2020 Aug 24.

Systematic exploration and uncertainty dominate young children's choices.

Blanco NJ(1), Sloutsky VM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.

Organisms need to constantly balance the competing demands of gathering 
information and using previously acquired information to obtain rewarding 
outcomes (i.e., the "exploration-exploitation" dilemma). Exploration is critical 
to obtain information to discover how the world works, which should be 
particularly important for young children. While studies have shown that young 
children explore in response to surprising events, little is known about how 
they balance exploration and exploitation across multiple decisions or about how 
this process changes with development. In this study, we compare decision-making 
patterns of children and adults and evaluate the relative influences of reward 
seeking, random exploration, and systematic switching (which approximates 
uncertainty-directed exploration). In a second experiment, we directly test the 
effect of uncertainty on children's choices. Influential models of 
decision-making generally describe systematic exploration as a computationally 
refined capacity that relies on top-down cognitive control. We demonstrate that 
(a) systematic patterns dominate young children's behavior (facilitating 
exploration), despite protracted development of cognitive control; and (b) that 
uncertainty plays a major, but complicated, role in determining children's 
choices. We conclude that while young children's immature top-down control 
should hinder adult-like systematic exploration, other mechanisms may pick up 
the slack, facilitating broad information gathering in a systematic fashion to 
build a foundation of knowledge for use later in life.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13026
PMCID: PMC7867663
PMID: 32767496

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.


787. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13022. doi: 10.1111/desc.13022. Epub 2020 Aug 27.

Aberrant Cerebellar Resting-State Functional Connectivity Related to Reading 
Performance in Struggling Readers.

Greeley B(1), Weber RC(2), Denyer R(3), Ferris JK(4), Rubino C(4), White K(1), 
Boyd LA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Educational & Counselling Psychology, and Special Education, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(3)University of British Columbia, Neuroscience, Vancouver, Canada.
(4)University of British Columbia, Rehabilitation Sciences, Vancouver, Canada.

Reading is a critical neurodevelopmental skill for school-aged children, which 
requires a distributed network of brain regions including the cerebellum. 
However, we do not know how functional connectivity between the cerebellum and 
other brain regions contributes to reading. Here we used resting-state 
functional connectivity to understand the cerebellum's role in decoding, reading 
speed, and comprehension in a group of struggling readers (RD) and a group of 
adolescents and children with typical reading abilities (TD). We observed an 
increase in functional connectivity between the sensorimotor network and the 
left angular gyrus, left lateral occipital cortex, and right inferior frontal 
gyrus in the RD group relative to the TD group. Additionally, functional 
connectivity between the cerebellum network and the precentral gyrus was 
decreased and was related to reading fluency in the RD group. Seed-based 
analysis revealed increased functional connectivity between crus 1, lobule 6, 
and lobule 8 of the cerebellum and brain regions related to the default mode 
network and the motor system for the RD group. We also found associations 
between reading performance and the functional connectivity between lobule 8 of 
the cerebellum and the left angular gyrus for both groups, with stronger 
relationships in the TD group. Specifically, the RD group displayed a positive 
relationship between functional connectivity, whereas the TD group displayed the 
opposite relationship. These results suggest that the cerebellum is involved in 
multiple components of reading performance and that functional connectivity 
differences observed in the RD group may contribute to poor reading performance.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13022
PMID: 32687663


788. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13013. doi: 10.1111/desc.13013. Epub 2020 Aug 7.

Are category labels primary? Children use similarities to reason about social 
groups.

Jordan A(1), Dunham Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.

While interpersonal similarities impact young children's peer judgments, little 
work has assessed whether they also guide group-based reasoning. A common 
assumption has been that category labels rather than 'mere' similarities are 
unique constituents of such reasoning; the present work challenges this. 
Children (ages 3-9) viewed groups defined by category labels or shared 
preferences, and their social inferences were assessed. By age 5, children used 
both types of information to licence predictions about preferences (Study 1, 
n = 129) and richer forms of coalitional structure (Study 2, n = 205). Low-level 
explanations could not account for this pattern (Study 3, n = 72). Finally, 
older but not younger children privileged labelled categories when they were 
pitted against similarity (Study 4, n = 51). These studies show that young 
children use shared preferences to reason about relationships and coalitional 
structure, suggesting that similarities are central to the emergence of group 
representations.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13013
PMID: 32627914


789. Dev Sci. 2019 Jan;22(1):e12747. doi: 10.1111/desc.12747. Epub 2018 Sep 29.

Remapping the cognitive and neural profiles of children who struggle at school.

Astle DE(1), Bathelt J(1); CALM Team, Holmes J(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
UK.

Our understanding of learning difficulties largely comes from children with 
specific diagnoses or individuals selected from community/clinical samples 
according to strict inclusion criteria. Applying strict exclusionary criteria 
overemphasizes within group homogeneity and between group differences, and fails 
to capture comorbidity. Here, we identify cognitive profiles in a large 
heterogeneous sample of struggling learners, using unsupervised machine learning 
in the form of an artificial neural network. Children were referred to the 
Centre for Attention Learning and Memory (CALM) by health and education 
professionals, irrespective of diagnosis or comorbidity, for problems in 
attention, memory, language, or poor school progress (n = 530). Children 
completed a battery of cognitive and learning assessments, underwent a 
structural MRI scan, and their parents completed behavior questionnaires. Within 
the network we could identify four groups of children: (a) children with broad 
cognitive difficulties, and severe reading, spelling and maths problems; (b) 
children with age-typical cognitive abilities and learning profiles; (c) 
children with working memory problems; and (d) children with phonological 
difficulties. Despite their contrasting cognitive profiles, the learning 
profiles for the latter two groups did not differ: both were around 1 SD below 
age-expected levels on all learning measures. Importantly a child's cognitive 
profile was not predicted by diagnosis or referral reason. We also constructed 
whole-brain structural connectomes for children from these four groupings 
(n = 184), alongside an additional group of typically developing children 
(n = 36), and identified distinct patterns of brain organization for each group. 
This study represents a novel move toward identifying data-driven neurocognitive 
dimensions underlying learning-related difficulties in a representative sample 
of poor learners.

© 2018 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12747
PMCID: PMC6808180
PMID: 30171790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


790. Dev Sci. 2018 Jan;21(1):e12501. doi: 10.1111/desc.12501. Epub 2016 Oct 17.

Oculomotor atypicalities in Developmental Coordination Disorder.

Sumner E(1), Hutton SB(2), Kuhn G(1), Hill EL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK.
(2)School of Psychology, University of Sussex, UK.

Children with Developmental Coordination Disorder (DCD) fail to acquire adequate 
motor skill, yet surprisingly little is known about the oculomotor system in 
DCD. Successful completion of motor tasks is supported by accurate visual 
feedback. The purpose of this study was to determine whether any oculomotor 
differences can distinguish between children with and without a motor 
impairment. Using eye tracking technology, visual fixation, smooth pursuit, and 
pro- and anti-saccade performance were assessed in 77 children that formed three 
groups: children with DCD (aged 7-10), chronologically age (CA) matched peers, 
and a motor-match (MM) group (aged 4-7). Pursuit gain and response preparation 
in the pro- and anti-saccade tasks were comparable across groups. Compared to 
age controls, children with DCD had deficits in maintaining engagement in the 
fixation and pursuit tasks, and made more anti-saccade errors. The two typically 
developing groups performed similarly, except on the fast speed smooth pursuit 
and antisaccade tasks, where the CA group outperformed the younger MM group. The 
findings suggest that children with DCD have problems with saccadic inhibition 
and maintaining attention on a visual target. Developmental patterns were 
evident in the typically developing groups, suggesting that the pursuit system 
and cognitive control develop with age. This study adds to the literature by 
being the first to systematically identify specific oculomotor differences 
between children with and without a motor impairment. Further examination of 
oculomotor control may help to identify underlying processes contributing to 
DCD. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at: 
https://youtu.be/NinXa2KlB4M. [Correction added on 27 January 2017, after first 
online publication: The video abstract link was added.].

© 2016 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12501
PMCID: PMC5763390
PMID: 27753223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


791. Dev Sci. 2017 Nov;20(6). doi: 10.1111/desc.12472. Epub 2016 Oct 16.

Predictive coding accelerates word recognition and learning in the early stages 
of language development.

Ylinen S(1), Bosseler A(1), Junttila K(1), Huotilainen M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Brain Research Unit, Institute of Behavioural Sciences, University 
of Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, Helsinki, Finland.

The ability to predict future events in the environment and learn from them is a 
fundamental component of adaptive behavior across species. Here we propose that 
inferring predictions facilitates speech processing and word learning in the 
early stages of language development. Twelve- and 24-month olds' 
electrophysiological brain responses to heard syllables are faster and more 
robust when the preceding word context predicts the ending of a familiar word. 
For unfamiliar, novel word forms, however, word-expectancy violation generates a 
prediction error response, the strength of which significantly correlates with 
children's vocabulary scores at 12 months. These results suggest that predictive 
coding may accelerate word recognition and support early learning of novel 
words, including not only the learning of heard word forms but also their 
mapping to meanings. Prediction error may mediate learning via attention, since 
infants' attention allocation to the entire learning situation in natural 
environments could account for the link between prediction error and the 
understanding of word meanings. On the whole, the present results on predictive 
coding support the view that principles of brain function reported across 
domains in humans and non-human animals apply to language and its development in 
the infant brain. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at: 
http://hy.fi/unitube/video/e1cbb495-41d8-462e-8660-0864a1abd02c. [Correction 
added on 27 January 2017, after first online publication: The video abstract 
link was added.].

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12472
PMID: 27747989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


792. Dev Sci. 2017 Sep;20(5):10.1111/desc.12455. doi: 10.1111/desc.12455. Epub 2016 
Oct 16.

Event-related potential differences in children supplemented with long-chain 
polyunsaturated fatty acids during infancy.

Liao K(1), McCandliss BD(2), Carlson SE(3), Colombo J(4), Shaddy DJ(3), Kerling 
EH(3), Lepping RJ(1), Sittiprapaporn W(1)(5), Cheatham CL(6), Gustafson 
KM(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Hoglund Brain Imaging Center, University of Kansas Medical Center, USA.
(2)Graduate School of Education, Stanford University, USA.
(3)Department of Dietetics and Nutrition, University of Kansas Medical Center, 
USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Kansas, USA.
(5)School of Anti-Aging and Regenerative Medicine, Mae Fah Luang University, 
Bangkok, Thailand.
(6)Department of Psychology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, University of Kansas Medical Center, USA.

Long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LCPUFA) have been shown to be necessary 
for early retinal and brain development, but long-term cognitive benefits of 
LCPUFA in infancy have not been definitively established. The present study 
sought to determine whether LCPUFA supplementation during the first year of life 
would result in group differences in behavior and event-related potentials 
(ERPs) while performing a task requiring response inhibition (Go/No-Go) at 
5.5 years of age. As newborns, 69 children were randomly assigned to infant 
formulas containing either no LCPUFA (control) or formula with 0.64% of total 
fatty acids as arachidonic acid (ARA; 20:4n6) and various concentrations of 
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA; 22:6n3) (0.32%, 0.64% or 0.96%) for the first 
12 months of life. At 5.5 years of age, a task designed to test the ability to 
inhibit a prepotent response (Go/No-Go) was administered, yielding both 
event-related potentials (ERPs) and behavioral data. Behavioral measures did not 
differ between groups, although reaction times of supplemented children were 
marginally faster. Unsupplemented children had lower P2 amplitude than 
supplemented children to both Go and No-Go conditions. N2 amplitude was 
significantly higher on No-Go trials than Go trials, but only for supplemented 
children, resulting in a significant Group × Condition interaction. 
Topographical analysis of the ERPs revealed that the LCPUFA-supplemented group 
developed a novel period of synchronous activation (microstate) involving wider 
anterior brain activation around 200 ms; this microstate was not present in 
controls. These findings suggest that LCPUFA supplementation during the first 
12 months of life exerts a developmental programming effect that is manifest in 
brain electrophysiology. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oM2leg4sevs.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12455
PMCID: PMC5392436
PMID: 27747986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The remaining authors declare no conflicts or 
financial interests or holdings.


793. Dev Sci. 2017 Jul;20(4). doi: 10.1111/desc.12405. Epub 2016 Sep 29.

Bilingual advantage, bidialectal advantage or neither? Comparing performance 
across three tests of executive function in middle childhood.

Ross J(1), Melinger A(1).

Author information:
(1)Psychology, School of Social Sciences, University of Dundee, I. E.

When bilinguals speak, both fluent language systems become activated in parallel 
and exert an influence on speech production. As a consequence of maintaining 
separation between the two linguistic systems, bilinguals are purported to 
develop enhanced executive control functioning. Like bilinguals, individuals who 
speak two dialects must also maintain separation between two linguistic systems, 
albeit to a lesser degree. Across three tests of executive function, we compared 
bilingual and bidialectal children's performance to that of a monolingual 
control group. No evidence for a bidialectal advantage was found. However, in 
line with a growing number of recent partial and failed replications, we 
observed a significant bilingual advantage only in one measure in one task. This 
calls the robustness of the bilingual advantage into question. A comprehensive 
review of studies investigating advantages of inhibitory control and cognitive 
flexibility in bilingual children reveals that the bilingual advantage is likely 
to be both task and sample specific, and the interaction between these factors 
makes qualification of the effect challenging. These findings highlight the 
importance of tracking the impact of dual linguistic systems across the lifespan 
using tasks calibrated for difficulty across different ages.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12405
PMID: 27684381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


794. Dev Sci. 2017 Sep;20(5). doi: 10.1111/desc.12444. Epub 2016 Sep 1.

Anticipatory scene representation in preschool children's recall and recognition 
memory.

Kreindel E(1), Intraub H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Delaware, USA.

Behavioral and neuroscience research on boundary extension (false memory beyond 
the edges of a view of a scene) has provided new insights into the constructive 
nature of scene representation, and motivates questions about development. Early 
research with children (as young as 6-7 years) was consistent with boundary 
extension, but relied on an analysis of spatial errors in drawings which are 
open to alternative explanations (e.g. drawing ability). Experiment 1 replicated 
and extended prior drawing results with 4-5-year-olds and adults. In Experiment 
2, a new, forced-choice immediate recognition memory test was implemented with 
the same children. On each trial, a card (photograph of a simple scene) was 
immediately replaced by a test card (identical view and either a closer or more 
wide-angle view) and participants indicated which one matched the original view. 
Error patterns supported boundary extension; identical photographs were more 
frequently rejected when the closer view was the original view, than vice versa. 
This asymmetry was not attributable to a selection bias (guessing tasks; 
Experiments 3-5). In Experiment 4, working memory load was increased by 
presenting more expansive views of more complex scenes. Again, children 
exhibited boundary extension, but now adults did not, unless stimulus duration 
was reduced to 5 s (limiting time to implement strategies; Experiment 5). We 
propose that like adults, children interpret photographs as views of places in 
the world; they extrapolate the anticipated continuation of the scene beyond the 
view and misattribute it to having been seen. Developmental differences in 
source attribution decision processes provide an explanation for the age-related 
differences observed.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12444
PMID: 27582346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


795. Dev Sci. 2017 Sep;20(5). doi: 10.1111/desc.12450. Epub 2016 Jul 19.

Functional brain organization of working memory in adolescents varies in 
relation to family income and academic achievement.

Finn AS(1), Minas JE(2), Leonard JA(2), Mackey AP(2), Salvatore J(2), Goetz 
C(2), West MR(3), Gabrieli CFO(3)(4), Gabrieli JDE(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Canada.
(2)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences and McGovern Institute for Brain 
Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA.
(3)Graduate School of Education, Harvard University, USA.
(4)Transforming Education/National Center on Time & Learning, Boston, USA.

Working memory (WM) capacity reflects executive functions associated with 
performance on a wide range of cognitive tasks and education outcomes, including 
mathematics achievement, and is associated with dorsolateral prefrontal and 
parietal cortices. Here we asked if family income is associated with variation 
in the functional brain organization of WM capacity among adolescents, and 
whether that variation is associated with performance on a statewide test of 
academic achievement in mathematics. Participants were classified into 
higher-income and lower-income groups based on family income, and performed a WM 
task with a parametric manipulation of WM load (N-back task) during functional 
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Behaviorally, the higher-income group had 
greater WM capacity and higher mathematics achievement scores. Neurally, the 
higher-income group showed greater activation as a function of WM load in 
bilateral prefrontal, parietal, and other regions, although the lower-income 
group exhibited greater activation at the lowest load. Both groups exhibited 
positive correlations between parietal activations and mathematics achievement 
scores, but only the higher-income group exhibited a positive correlation 
between prefrontal activations and mathematics scores. Most of these findings 
were maintained when higher- and lower-income groups were matched on WM task 
performance or nonverbal IQ. Findings indicate that the functional neural 
architecture of WM varies with family income and is associated with education 
measures of mathematics achievement.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12450
PMID: 27434857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


796. Dev Sci. 2017 Jul;20(4). doi: 10.1111/desc.12451. Epub 2016 Jun 19.

Pubertal development shapes perception of complex facial expressions.

Motta-Mena NV(1), Scherf KS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Center for Brain, Behavior and Cognition, Penn 
State University, USA.

We previously hypothesized that pubertal development shapes the emergence of new 
components of face processing (Scherf et al., 2012; Garcia & Scherf, 2015). 
Here, we evaluate this hypothesis by investigating emerging perceptual 
sensitivity to complex versus basic facial expressions across pubertal 
development. We tested pre-pubescent children (6-8 years), age- and sex-matched 
adolescents in early and later stages of pubertal development (11-14 years), and 
sexually mature adults (18-24 years). Using a perceptual staircase procedure, 
participants made visual discriminations of both socially complex expressions 
(sexual interest, contempt) that are arguably relevant to emerging peer-oriented 
relationships of adolescence, and basic (happy, anger) expressions that are 
important even in early infancy. Only sensitivity to detect complex expressions 
improved as a function of pubertal development. The ability to perceive these 
expressions is adult-like by late puberty when adolescents become sexually 
mature. This pattern of results provides the first evidence that pubertal 
development specifically influences emerging affective components of face 
perception in adolescence.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12451
PMID: 27321445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


797. Dev Sci. 2017 May;20(3). doi: 10.1111/desc.12426. Epub 2016 Jun 2.

Adaptive specialization in position encoding while learning to read.

Tóth D(1), Csépe V(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Brain Imaging Centre, Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Hungarian Academy 
of Sciences, Hungary.
(2)Department of Cognitive Science, Budapest University of Technology and 
Economics, Hungary.

The present experiments focused on how orthographic processing develops during 
reading acquisition. Specifically, a large, cross-sectional sample of children 
from grade 2 to grade 4 was exposed to pairs of words, pseudowords, digit 
strings, and pseudo-letter (Armenian) strings while their sensitivity to 
transpositions (T) and substitutions (S) of internal characters was investigated 
in a perceptual matching task. The results showed that the development of 
identity and position decoding diverged between the four stimulus categories. 
Most importantly, sensitivity improved with longer exposure to formal education 
and higher reading level to both S and T pairs for digit strings, but only to S 
pairs for words and pseudowords. The results were successfully reproduced in two 
small independent samples. We propose a general framework, the Adaptive 
Specialization Hypothesis, to accommodate the results. According to this 
hypothesis, the transposed-letter effect is not a hard-wired feature of the 
orthographic processing system but an adaptive response of the developing 
orthographic system to the constraints of lexical access in several 
orthographies.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12426
PMID: 27256446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


798. Dev Sci. 2017 Jan;20(1):10.1111/desc.12425. doi: 10.1111/desc.12425. Epub 2016 
May 19.

Caregiver talk to young Spanish-English bilinguals: comparing direct observation 
and parent-report measures of dual-language exposure.

Marchman VA(1), Martínez LZ(1), Hurtado N(1), Grüter T(2), Fernald A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, USA.
(2)Department of Second Language Studies, University of Hawai'i at Manoa, USA.

In research on language development by bilingual children, the early language 
environment is commonly characterized in terms of the relative amount of 
exposure a child gets to each language based on parent report. Little is known 
about how absolute measures of child-directed speech in two languages relate to 
language growth. In this study of 3-year-old Spanish-English bilinguals 
(n = 18), traditional parent-report estimates of exposure were compared to 
measures of the number of Spanish and English words children heard during 
naturalistic audio recordings. While the two estimates were moderately 
correlated, observed numbers of child-directed words were more consistently 
predictive of children's processing speed and standardized test performance, 
even when controlling for reported proportion of exposure. These findings 
highlight the importance of caregiver engagement in bilingual children's 
language outcomes in both of the languages they are learning.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12425
PMCID: PMC5116283
PMID: 27197746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


799. Dev Sci. 2017 Jan;20(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12446. Epub 2016 May 15.

The influence of bilingualism on the preference for the mouth region of dynamic 
faces.

Ayneto A(1), Sebastian-Galles N(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Brain and Cognition, Department of Technology, Universitat Pompeu 
Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.

Bilingual infants show an extended period of looking at the mouth of talking 
faces, which provides them with additional articulatory cues that can be used to 
boost the challenging situation of learning two languages (Pons, Bosch & 
Lewkowicz, 2015). However, the eye region also provides fundamental cues for 
emotion perception and recognition, as well as communication. Here, we explored 
whether the adaptations resulting from learning two languages are specific to 
linguistic content or if they also influence the focus of attention when looking 
at dynamic faces. We recorded the eye gaze of bilingual and monolingual infants 
(8- and 12-month-olds) while watching videos of infants and adults portraying 
different emotional states (neutral, crying, and laughing). When looking at 
infant faces, bilinguals looked longer at the mouth region as compared to 
monolinguals regardless of age. However, when presented with adult faces, 
8-month-old bilingual infants looked longer at the mouth region and less at the 
eye region compared to 8-month-old monolingual infants, but no effect of 
language exposure was found at 12 months of age. These findings suggest that the 
bias to the mouth region in bilingual infants at 8 months of age can be 
generalized to other audiovisual dynamic faces that do not contain linguistic 
information. We discuss the potential implications of such bias in early social 
and communicative development.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12446
PMID: 27196790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


800. Dev Sci. 2017 Jul;20(4):10.1111/desc.12421. doi: 10.1111/desc.12421. Epub 2016 
May 4.

The organization of exploratory behaviors in infant locomotor planning.

Kretch KS(1), Adolph KE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, New York University, USA.

How do infants plan and guide locomotion under challenging conditions? This 
experiment investigated the real-time process of visual and haptic exploration 
in 14-month-old infants as they decided whether and how to walk over challenging 
terrain - a series of bridges varying in width. Infants' direction of gaze was 
recorded with a head-mounted eye tracker and their haptic exploration and 
locomotor actions were captured on video. Infants' exploration was an organized, 
efficient sequence of visual, haptic, and locomotor behaviors. They used visual 
exploration from a distance as an initial assessment on nearly every bridge. 
Visual information subsequently prompted gait modifications while approaching 
narrow bridges and haptic exploration at the edge of the bridge. Results confirm 
predictions about the sequential, ramping-up process of exploration and the 
distinct roles of vision and touch. Exploration, however, was not a guarantee of 
adaptive decisions. With walking experience, exploratory behaviors became 
increasingly efficient and infants were better able to interpret the resulting 
perceptual information in terms of whether it was safe to walk.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12421
PMCID: PMC5097037
PMID: 27147103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


801. Dev Sci. 2017 Jul;20(4):10.1111/desc.12401. doi: 10.1111/desc.12401. Epub 2016 
Apr 7.

Longitudinal development of manual motor ability in autism spectrum disorder 
from childhood to mid-adulthood relates to adaptive daily living skills.

Travers BG(1)(2), Bigler ED(3)(4), Duffield TC(3), Prigge MDB(5), Froehlich 
AL(5), Lange N(6)(7)(8), Alexander AL(2)(9)(10), Lainhart JE(2)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Kinesiology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA.
(2)Waisman Laboratory for Brain Imaging and Behavior, Waisman Center, University 
of Wisconsin-Madison, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience Center, Brigham Young University, 
USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of Utah, USA.
(5)Department of Radiology, University of Utah, USA.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, Harvard University, USA.
(7)Department of Biostatistics, Harvard University, USA.
(8)Neurostatistics Laboratory, McLean Hospital, Belmont, MA, USA.
(9)Department of Medical Physics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA.
(10)Department of Psychiatry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA.

Many individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) exhibit motor difficulties, 
but it is unknown whether manual motor skills improve, plateau, or decline in 
ASD in the transition from childhood into adulthood. Atypical development of 
manual motor skills could impact the ability to learn and perform daily 
activities across the life span. This study examined longitudinal grip strength 
and finger tapping development in individuals with ASD (n = 90) compared to 
individuals with typical development (n = 56), ages 5 to 40 years old. We 
further examined manual motor performance as a possible correlate of current and 
future daily living skills. The group with ASD demonstrated atypical motor 
development, characterized by similar performance during childhood but 
increasingly poorer performance from adolescence into adulthood. Grip strength 
was correlated with current adaptive daily living skills, and Time 1 grip 
strength predicted daily living skills eight years into the future. These 
results suggest that individuals with ASD may experience increasingly more 
pronounced motor difficulties from adolescence into adulthood and that manual 
motor performance in ASD is related to adaptive daily living skills.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12401
PMCID: PMC5055420
PMID: 27061223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


802. Dev Sci. 2017 Jul;20(4). doi: 10.1111/desc.12397. Epub 2016 Feb 26.

Learning the association between a context and a target location in infancy.

Bertels J(1)(2), San Anton E(1)(2), Gebuis T(3), Destrebecqz A(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Research in Cognition and Neurosciences (CRCN) and ULB 
Neuroscience Institute (UNI), Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium.
(2)Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique - FNRS, Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research (CNCR), VU University 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Extracting the statistical regularities present in the environment is a central 
learning mechanism in infancy. For instance, infants are able to learn the 
associations between simultaneously or successively presented visual objects 
(Fiser & Aslin, ; Kirkham, Slemmer & Johnson, ). The present study extends these 
results by investigating whether infants can learn the association between a 
target location and the context in which it is presented. With this aim, we used 
a visual associative learning procedure inspired by the contextual cuing 
paradigm, with infants from 8 to 12 months of age. In two experiments, in which 
we varied the complexity of the stimuli, we first habituated infants to several 
scenes where the location of a target (a cartoon character) was consistently 
associated with a context, namely a specific configuration of geometrical 
shapes. Second, we examined whether infants learned the covariation between the 
target location and the context by measuring looking times at scenes that either 
respected or violated the association. In both experiments, results showed that 
infants learned the target-context associations, as they looked longer at the 
familiar scenes than at the novel ones. In particular, infants selected clusters 
of co-occurring contextual shapes and learned the covariation between the target 
location and this subset. These results support the existence of a powerful and 
versatile statistical learning mechanism that may influence the orientation of 
infants' visual attention toward areas of interest in their environment during 
early developmental stages. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Hm1unyLBn0.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12397
PMID: 26919798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


803. Dev Sci. 2017 Jan;20(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12406. Epub 2016 Jan 29.

Predicting writing development in dual language instructional contexts: 
exploring cross-linguistic relationships.

Savage R(1), Kozakewich M(1), Genesee F(2), Erdos C(3), Haigh C(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Educational and Counselling Psychology, McGill University, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology, McGill University, Canada.
(3)McGill University Health Centre, Department of Speech-Language Pathology, 
Montreal Children's Hospital, Canada.
(4)School of Education, Bishops University, Canada.

This study examined whether decoding and linguistic comprehension abilities, 
broadly defined by the Simple View of Reading, in grade 1 each uniquely 
predicted the grade 6 writing performance of English-speaking children (n = 76) 
who were educated bilingually in both English their first language and French, a 
second language. Prediction was made from (1) English to English; (2) French to 
French; and (3) English to French. Results showed that both decoding and 
linguistic comprehension scores predicted writing accuracy but rarely predicted 
persuasive writing. Within the linguistic comprehension cluster of tests, 
Formulating Sentences was a strong consistent within- and between-language 
predictor of writing accuracy. In practical terms, the present results indicate 
that early screening for later writing ability using measures of sentence 
formulation early in students' schooling, in their L1 or L2, can provide 
greatest predictive power and allow teachers to differentiate instruction in the 
primary grades. Theoretically, the present results argue that there are 
correlations between reading-related abilities and writing abilities not only 
within the same language but also across languages, adding to the growing body 
of evidence for facilitative cross-linguistic relationships between bilinguals' 
developing languages.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12406
PMID: 26825571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


804. Dev Sci. 2017 May;20(3). doi: 10.1111/desc.12372. Epub 2016 Jan 14.

Associations of non-symbolic and symbolic numerical magnitude processing with 
mathematical competence: a meta-analysis.

Schneider M(1), Beeres K(1), Coban L(1), Merz S(1), Susan Schmidt S(1), Stricker 
J(1), De Smedt B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Trier, Germany.
(2)Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, Parenting and Special 
Education Research Group, KU Leuven, University of Leuven, Belgium.

Many studies have investigated the association between numerical magnitude 
processing skills, as assessed by the numerical magnitude comparison task, and 
broader mathematical competence, e.g. counting, arithmetic, or algebra. Most 
correlations were positive but varied considerably in their strengths. It 
remains unclear whether and to what extent the strength of these associations 
differs systematically between non-symbolic and symbolic magnitude comparison 
tasks and whether age, magnitude comparison measures or mathematical competence 
measures are additional moderators. We investigated these questions by means of 
a meta-analysis. The literature search yielded 45 articles reporting 284 effect 
sizes found with 17,201 participants. Effect sizes were combined by means of a 
two-level random-effects regression model. The effect size was significantly 
higher for the symbolic (r = .302, 95% CI [.243, .361]) than for the 
non-symbolic (r = .241, 95% CI [.198, .284]) magnitude comparison task and 
decreased very slightly with age. The correlation was higher for solution rates 
and Weber fractions than for alternative measures of comparison proficiency. It 
was higher for mathematical competencies that rely more heavily on the 
processing of magnitudes (i.e. mental arithmetic and early mathematical 
abilities) than for others. The results support the view that magnitude 
processing is reliably associated with mathematical competence over the lifespan 
in a wide range of tasks, measures and mathematical subdomains. The association 
is stronger for symbolic than for non-symbolic numerical magnitude processing. 
So symbolic magnitude processing might be a more eligible candidate to be 
targeted by diagnostic screening instruments and interventions for school-aged 
children and for adults.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12372
PMID: 26768176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


805. Dev Sci. 2016 Jul;19(4):564-80. doi: 10.1111/desc.12400. Epub 2016 Jan 11.

Functional connectivity of brain regions for self- and other-evaluation in 
children, adolescents and adults with autism.

Burrows CA(1), Laird AR(2), Uddin LQ(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Miami, USA.
(2)Department of Physics, Florida International University Miami, USA.
(3)Neuroscience Program, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, USA.

Developing strong ties between oneself and others lays the foundation for 
developing social competence. Neuroimaging studies have consistently identified 
specific cortical midline regions activated during evaluative judgments about 
the self and others. Individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) process 
self-relevant information differently from their peers, both behaviorally and at 
the neural level. We compared resting-state functional connectivity (rsFC) of 
regions involved in self-referential (e.g. medial prefrontal cortex; mPFC) and 
other-referential (e.g. posterior cingulate cortex; PCC) processing between 
neurotypical individuals and individuals with ASD in three age cohorts using 
regions of interest (ROIs) identified through an activation likelihood 
estimation meta-analysis. Typically developing children demonstrated greater 
connectivity within the midline self- and other-referential networks compared 
with age-matched children with ASD. No group differences in rsFC of mPFC or PCC 
emerged between typically developing adolescents and adolescents with ASD. 
Neurotypical adults exhibited stronger rsFC of the PCC with orbitofrontal cortex 
compared with adults with ASD. Developmental differences in functional 
connectivity between areas underlying self- and other-referential thought may 
explain altered developmental trajectories in the understanding of self and 
others in individuals with ASD.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12400
PMID: 26750447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


806. Dev Sci. 2017 May;20(3):10.1111/desc.12381. doi: 10.1111/desc.12381. Epub 2016 
Jan 6.

Selective attention to a talker's mouth in infancy: role of audiovisual temporal 
synchrony and linguistic experience.

Hillairet de Boisferon A(1), Tift AH(2), Minar NJ(2), Lewkowicz DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northeastern University, 
USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Florida Atlantic University, USA.

Previous studies have found that infants shift their attention from the eyes to 
the mouth of a talker when they enter the canonical babbling phase after 6 
months of age. Here, we investigated whether this increased attentional focus on 
the mouth is mediated by audio-visual synchrony and linguistic experience. To do 
so, we tracked eye gaze in 4-, 6-, 8-, 10-, and 12-month-old infants while they 
were exposed either to desynchronized native or desynchronized non-native 
audiovisual fluent speech. Results indicated that, regardless of language, 
desynchronization disrupted the usual pattern of relative attention to the eyes 
and mouth found in response to synchronized speech at 10 months but not at any 
other age. These findings show that audio-visual synchrony mediates selective 
attention to a talker's mouth just prior to the emergence of initial language 
expertise and that it declines in importance once infants become native-language 
experts.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12381
PMCID: PMC6340138
PMID: 26743437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


807. Dev Sci. 2017 Mar;20(2):e12376. doi: 10.1111/desc.12376. Epub 2015 Dec 27.

Understanding the genetic and environmental specificity and overlap between 
well-being and internalizing symptoms in adolescence.

Haworth CM(1), Carter K(2), Eley TC(2), Plomin R(2).

Author information:
(1)MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, School of Experimental Psychology & School 
of Social and Community Medicine, University of Bristol, UK.
(2)Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, King's College London, 
UK.

Moderate inverse correlations are typically found between well-being and mental 
illness. We aimed to investigate the role of genes and environments in 
explaining the relationships between two aspects of well-being and two measures 
of internalizing symptoms. Altogether, 4700 pairs of 16-year-old twins 
contributed data on subjective happiness and life satisfaction, as well as 
symptoms of depression and emotional problems. Well-being was moderately 
correlated with internalizing symptoms (range = -0.45, -0.58). Multivariate twin 
model-fitting indicated both genetic and environmental overlap. Life 
satisfaction and happiness demonstrated different patterns of overlap, with 
stronger genetic links between life satisfaction and depression. Non-shared 
environmental influences were largely specific to each trait. This study 
supports the theory of mental health and illness being partly (but not entirely) 
correlated dimensions. There are also significant genetic and environmental 
factors to identify for well-being that go beyond the absence of mental illness. 
It is therefore possible that different interventions are needed for treating 
mental illness and promoting mental health.

© 2015 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12376
PMCID: PMC5347864
PMID: 26709037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


808. Dev Sci. 2016 Jul;19(4):550-63. doi: 10.1111/desc.12359. Epub 2015 Nov 27.

Atypical developmental of dorsal and ventral attention networks in autism.

Farrant K(1), Uddin LQ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Miami, USA.
(2)Neuroscience Program, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, USA.

Individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) exhibit early and lifelong 
impairments in attention across multiple domains. While the disorder is known to 
affect attention processes, very little is currently known about the brain 
networks underlying attention in ASD, and even less is known about whether these 
atypicalities persist across the lifespan. We used functional connectivity 
analysis applied to resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) 
data to explore the dorsal (DAN) and ventral (VAN) attention networks in two 
separate age cohorts of children and adults with and without ASD. We find 
significant developmental differences in functional connectivity of brain 
regions that are critical for attention in children and adults with ASD. 
Specifically, children with ASD show hyper-connectivity of regions-of-interest 
(ROIs) in both attention networks compared with both typically developing (TD) 
children and adults with ASD. In contrast, adults with ASD show 
hypo-connectivity of these networks compared with neurotypical adults. These 
findings are consistent with the notion that consideration of developmental 
stage is critical in studies of functional connectivity in ASD. This study 
further illustrates diverging developmental patterns for top-down and bottom-up 
attention systems in autism.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12359
PMID: 26613549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


809. Dev Sci. 2017 Mar;20(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12367. Epub 2015 Nov 16.

Transitive inference of social dominance by human infants.

Gazes RP(1)(2), Hampton RR(3)(4), Lourenco SF(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Program in Animal Behavior, Bucknell University, 
Lewisburg, USA.
(2)Research Department, Zoo Atlanta, Atlanta, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Emory University, Atlanta, USA.
(4)Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Atlanta, USA.

It is surprising that there are inconsistent findings of transitive inference 
(TI) in young infants given that non-linguistic species succeed on TI tests. To 
conclusively test for TI in infants, we developed a task within the social 
domain, with which infants are known to show sophistication. We familiarized 10- 
to 13-month-olds (M = 11.53 months) to a video of two dominance interactions 
between three puppets (bear > elephant; hippo > bear) consistent with a 
dominance hierarchy (hippo > bear > elephant; where '>' denotes greater 
dominance). Infants then viewed interactions between the two puppets that had 
not interacted during familiarization. These interactions were either congruent 
(hippo > elephant) or incongruent (elephant > hippo) with the inferred 
hierarchy. Consistent with TI, infants looked longer to incongruent than 
congruent displays. Control conditions ruled out the possibility that infants' 
expectations were based on stable behaviors specific to individual puppets 
rather than their inferred transitive dominance relations. We suggest that TI 
may be supported by phylogenetically ancient mechanisms of ordinal 
representation and visuospatial processing that come online early in human 
development.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12367
PMID: 26573240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


810. Dev Sci. 2017 Mar;20(2):10.1111/desc.12360. doi: 10.1111/desc.12360. Epub 2015 
Oct 21.

Splenium development and early spoken language in human infants.

Swanson MR(1), Wolff JJ(1)(2), Elison JT(3), Gu H(1)(4), Hazlett HC(1)(4), 
Botteron K(5), Styner M(1)(4)(6), Paterson S(7)(8), Gerig G(9), Constantino 
J(5), Dager S(10), Estes A(11), Vachet C(9), Piven J(1)(4); IBIS Network.

Collaborators: Hazlett HC, Chappell C, Dager S, Estes A, Shaw D, Botteron KN, 
McKinstry RC, Constantino J, Pruett J, Schultz RT, Paterson S, Zwaigenbaum L, 
Elison J, Evans AC, Collins DL, Pike GB, Fonov V, Kostopoulos P, Das S, Gerig G, 
Styner M, Gu H.

Author information:
(1)The Carolina Institute for Developmental Disabilities, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA.
(2)Department of Educational Psychology, University of Minnesota, USA.
(3)Institute of Child Development, University of Minnesota, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University, USA.
(6)Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
USA.
(7)Department of Psychology, Temple University, USA.
(8)Center for Autism Research, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, USA.
(9)Scientific Computing and Imaging Institute, University of Utah, USA.
(10)Department of Radiology, University of Washington, USA.
(11)Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences, University of Washington, USA.

The association between developmental trajectories of language-related white 
matter fiber pathways from 6 to 24 months of age and individual differences in 
language production at 24 months of age was investigated. The splenium of the 
corpus callosum, a fiber pathway projecting through the posterior hub of the 
default mode network to occipital visual areas, was examined as well as pathways 
implicated in language function in the mature brain, including the arcuate 
fasciculi, uncinate fasciculi, and inferior longitudinal fasciculi. The 
hypothesis that the development of neural circuitry supporting domain-general 
orienting skills would relate to later language performance was tested in a 
large sample of typically developing infants. The present study included 77 
infants with diffusion weighted MRI scans at 6, 12 and 24 months and language 
assessment at 24 months. The rate of change in splenium development varied 
significantly as a function of language production, such that children with 
greater change in fractional anisotropy (FA) from 6 to 24 months produced more 
words at 24 months. Contrary to findings from older children and adults, 
significant associations between language production and FA in the arcuate, 
uncinate, or left inferior longitudinal fasciculi were not observed. The current 
study highlights the importance of tracing brain development trajectories from 
infancy to fully elucidate emerging brain-behavior associations while also 
emphasizing the role of the splenium as a key node in the structural network 
that supports the acquisition of spoken language.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12360
PMCID: PMC4840090
PMID: 26490257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


811. Dev Sci. 2016 Sep;19(5):781-9. doi: 10.1111/desc.12321. Epub 2015 Aug 11.

The development of implicit gender attitudes.

Dunham Y(1), Baron AS(2), Banaji MR(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Department of Psychology, Harvard University, USA.

The development course of implicit and explicit gender attitudes between the 
ages of 5 and adulthood is investigated. Findings demonstrate that implicit and 
explicit own-gender preferences emerge early in both boys and girls, but 
implicit own-gender preferences are stronger in young girls than boys. In 
addition, female participants' attitudes remain largely stable over development, 
whereas male participants' implicit and explicit attitudes show an age-related 
shift towards increasing female positivity. Gender attitudes are an anomaly in 
that social evaluations dissociate from social status, with both male and female 
participants tending to evaluate female more positively than male.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12321
PMID: 26260250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


812. Dev Sci. 2016 Sep;19(5):853-62. doi: 10.1111/desc.12320. Epub 2015 Jun 15.

Longitudinal relations among exuberance, externalizing behaviors, and 
attentional bias to reward: the mediating role of effortful control.

Morales S(1), Pérez-Edgar K(1), Buss K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State University, USA.

The present study examined the associations between temperamental exuberance 
during toddlerhood (20 months), attention bias towards reward at the end of 
kindergarten (76 months), and externalizing behaviors across the kindergarten 
year. Moreover, we examined the role of effortful control at 48 months on the 
relation between early exuberance and attention bias. Attention bias towards 
reward was positively predicted by exuberance, negatively predicted by effortful 
control, and positively related to externalizing problems. Finally, the 
longitudinal path between exuberance and attention bias to reward was mediated 
by effortful control - such that higher toddler exuberance led to increased 
attention bias towards reward by way of lower effortful control. These results 
extend the attention bias and socioemotional functioning literature and have 
implications for the identification of children at risk for behavioral problems.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12320
PMCID: PMC4679718
PMID: 26077132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


813. Dev Sci. 2016 Mar;19(2):208-20. doi: 10.1111/desc.12310. Epub 2015 May 1.

Three-year-olds express suspense when an agent approaches a scene with a false 
belief.

Moll H(1), Kane S(1), McGowan L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
USA.

Research on early false belief understanding has entirely relied on 
affect-neutral measures such as judgments (standard tasks), attentional 
allocation (looking duration, preferential looking, anticipatory looking), or 
active intervention. We used a novel, affective measure to test whether 
preschoolers affectively anticipate another's misguided acts. In two 
experiments, 3-year-olds showed more expressions of suspense (by, e.g. brow 
furrowing or lip biting) when they saw an agent approach a scene with a false as 
opposed to a true belief (Experiment 1) or ignorance (Experiment 2). This shows 
that the children anticipated the agent's surprise and disappointment when 
encountering reality. The findings suggest that early implicit knowledge of 
false beliefs includes anticipations of the affective implications of erring. 
This vital dimension of beliefs should no longer be ignored in research on early 
theory of mind.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12310
PMID: 25939730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


814. Dev Sci. 2016 Mar;19(2):195-207. doi: 10.1111/desc.12308. Epub 2015 May 1.

Infants' grip strength predicts mu rhythm attenuation during observation of 
lifting actions with weighted blocks.

Upshaw MB(1), Bernier RA(2), Sommerville JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Washington, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Washington, USA.

Research has established that the body is fundamentally involved in perception: 
bodily experience influences activation of the shared neural system underlying 
action perception and production during action observation, and bodily 
characteristics influence perception of the spatial environment. However, 
whether bodily characteristics influence action perception and its underlying 
neural system is unknown, particularly in early ontogeny. We measured grip 
strength in 12-month-old infants and investigated relations with mu rhythm 
attenuation, an electroencephalographic correlate of the neural system 
underlying action perception, during observation of lifting actions performed 
with differently weighted blocks. We found that infants with higher grip 
strength exhibited significant mu attenuation during observation of lifting 
actions, whereas infants with lower grip strength did not. Moreover, a 
progressively strong relation between grip strength and mu attenuation during 
observation of lifts was found with increased block weight. We propose that this 
relation is attributable to differences in infants' ability to recognize the 
effort associated with lifting objects of different weights, as a consequence of 
their developing strength. Together, our results extend the body's role in 
perception by demonstrating that bodily characteristics influence action 
perception by shaping the activation of its underlying neural system.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12308
PMCID: PMC5839743
PMID: 25939632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


815. Dev Sci. 2016 Mar;19(2):284-305. doi: 10.1111/desc.12303. Epub 2015 Apr 6.

The over-pruning hypothesis of autism.

Thomas MS(1), Davis R(1), Karmiloff-Smith A(1), Knowland VC(2), Charman T(3).

Author information:
(1)Developmental Neurocognition Lab, Centre for Brain & Cognitive Development, 
Birkbeck,University of London, UK.
(2)Division of Language and Communication Science, City University, UK.
(3)Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London, 
UK.

This article outlines the over-pruning hypothesis of autism. The hypothesis 
originates in a neurocomputational model of the regressive sub-type (Thomas, 
Knowland & Karmiloff-Smith, 2011a, 2011b). Here we develop a more general 
version of the over-pruning hypothesis to address heterogeneity in the timing of 
manifestation of ASD, including new computer simulations which reconcile the 
different observed developmental trajectories (early onset, late onset, 
regression) via a single underlying atypical mechanism; and which show how 
unaffected siblings of individuals with ASD may differ from controls either by 
inheriting a milder version of the pathological mechanism or by co-inheriting 
the risk factors without the pathological mechanism. The proposed atypical 
mechanism involves overly aggressive synaptic pruning in infancy and early 
childhood, an exaggeration of a normal phase of brain development. We show how 
the hypothesis generates novel predictions that differ from existing theories of 
ASD including that (1) the first few months of development in ASD will be 
indistinguishable from typical, and (2) the earliest atypicalities in ASD will 
be sensory and motor rather than social. Both predictions gain cautious support 
from emerging longitudinal studies of infants at-risk of ASD. We review evidence 
consistent with the over-pruning hypothesis, its relation to other current 
theories (including C. Frith's under-pruning proposal; C. Frith, 2003, 2004), as 
well as inconsistent data and current limitations. The hypothesis situates 
causal accounts of ASD within a framework of protective and risk factors 
(Newschaffer et al., 2012); clarifies different versions of the broader autism 
phenotype (i.e. the implication of observed similarities between individuals 
with autism and their family members); and integrates data from multiple 
disciplines, including behavioural studies, neuroscience studies, genetics, and 
intervention studies.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12303
PMID: 25845529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


816. Dev Sci. 2016 Mar;19(2):329-37. doi: 10.1111/desc.12299. Epub 2015 Mar 5.

Spontaneous non-verbal counting in toddlers.

Sella F(1), Berteletti I(2), Lucangeli D(3), Zorzi M(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Psychology, University of Padova, Italy.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Illinois Urbana Champaign, IL, USA.
(3)Department of Developmental Psychology and Socialization, University of 
Padova, Italy.
(4)Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, University of Padova, Italy.
(5)IRCCS San Camillo Hospital, Venice, Italy.

A wealth of studies have investigated numerical abilities in infants and in 
children aged 3 or above, but research on pre-counting toddlers is sparse. Here 
we devised a novel version of an imitation task that was previously used to 
assess spontaneous focusing on numerosity (i.e. the predisposition to grasp 
numerical properties of the environment) to assess whether pre-counters would 
spontaneously deploy sequential (item-by-item) enumeration and whether this 
ability would rely on the object tracking system (OTS) or on the approximate 
number system (ANS). Two-and-a-half-year-olds watched the experimenter 
performing one-by-one insertion of 'food tokens' into an opaque animal puppet 
and then were asked to imitate the puppet-feeding behavior. The number of tokens 
varied between 1 and 6 and each numerosity was presented many times to obtain a 
distribution of responses during imitation. Many children demonstrated attention 
to the numerosity of the food tokens despite the lack of any explicit cueing to 
the number dimension. Most notably, the response distributions centered on the 
target numerosities and showed the classic variability signature that is 
attributed to the ANS. These results are consistent with previous studies on 
sequential enumeration in non-human primates and suggest that pre-counting 
children are capable of sequentially updating the numerosity of non-visible sets 
through additive operations and hold it in memory for reproducing the observed 
behavior.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12299
PMID: 25754974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


817. Dev Sci. 2015 Sep;18(5):686-702. doi: 10.1111/desc.12246. Epub 2015 Feb 9.

Socioeconomic status and executive function: developmental trajectories and 
mediation.

Hackman DA(1), Gallop R(2), Evans GW(3), Farah MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Center for Neuroscience and Society, 
Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Mathematics and Applied Statistics, West Chester University, 
USA.
(3)Departments of Design and Environmental Analysis and Human Development, 
Bronfenbrenner Center for Translational Research, Cornell University, USA.

Childhood socioeconomic status (SES) predicts executive function (EF), but 
fundamental aspects of this relation remain unknown: the developmental course of 
the SES disparity, its continued sensitivity to SES changes during that course, 
and the features of childhood experience responsible for the SES-EF relation. 
Regarding course, early disparities would be expected to grow during development 
if caused by accumulating stressors at a given constant level of SES. 
Alternatively, they would narrow if schooling partly compensates for the effects 
of earlier deprivation, allowing lower-SES children to 'catch up'. The potential 
for later childhood SES change to affect EF is also unknown. Regarding mediating 
factors, previous analyses produced mixed answers, possibly due to correlation 
amongst candidate mediators. We address these issues with measures of SES, 
working memory and planning, along with multiple candidate mediators, from the 
NICHD Study of Early Childcare (n = 1009). Early family income-to-needs and 
maternal education predicted planning by first grade, and income-to-needs 
predicted working memory performance at 54 months. Effects of early SES remained 
consistent through middle childhood, indicating that the relation between early 
indicators of SES and EF emerges in childhood and persists without narrowing or 
widening across early and middle childhood. Changes in family income-to-needs 
were associated with significant changes in planning and trend-level changes in 
working memory. Mediation analyses supported the role of early childhood home 
characteristics in explaining the association between SES and EF, while early 
childhood maternal sensitivity was specifically implicated in the association 
between maternal education and planning. Early emerging and persistent 
SES-related differences in EF, partially explained by characteristics of the 
home and family environment, are thus a potential source of socioeconomic 
disparities in achievement and health across development.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12246
PMID: 25659838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


818. Dev Sci. 2015 Nov;18(6):877-93. doi: 10.1111/desc.12283. Epub 2015 Jan 20.

Signal clarity: an account of the variability in infant quantity discrimination 
tasks.

Cantrell L(1), Boyer TW(2), Cordes S(3), Smith LB(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Mind and Brain, University of California, Davis, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, George Southern University, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Boston College, USA.
(4)Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, USA.

Infants have shown variable success in quantity comparison tasks, with infants 
of a given age sometimes successfully discriminating numerical differences at a 
2:3 ratio but requiring 1:2 and even 1:4 ratios of change at other times. The 
current explanations for these variable results include the two-systems proposal 
- a theoretical framework that suggests that there are multiple systems at play 
and that these systems do not communicate early in infancy, leading to failure 
in certain numerical comparisons. An alternative proposal is that infants may be 
attending to continuous extent dimensions in these tasks rather than number per 
se. However, neither of these two main proposals is independently capable of 
accounting for the previously published data. Recently the Signal Clarity 
Hypothesis was proposed to account for and predict the variability (Cantrell & 
Smith, 2013). According to this hypothesis, infants' variable success may be 
understood from a framework of statistical learning taken together with the 
signal-to-noise ratio generated by control procedures in habituation tasks. Here 
we test specific predictions made by the Signal Clarity Hypothesis. Across four 
experiments assessing 9-month old discriminations of small and large sets (2 vs. 
4 and 3 vs. 4), we demonstrate that infant success can be predicted by this 
novel approach and, further, that infants may discriminate smaller ratios of 
change than previously believed (3:4 numerical change and 2:3 cumulative area 
change).

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12283
PMCID: PMC6448154
PMID: 25601156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


819. Dev Sci. 2015 Nov;18(6):1044-53. doi: 10.1111/desc.12278. Epub 2015 Jan 20.

Effects of motor action on affective preferences in autism spectrum disorders: 
different influences of embodiment.

Eigsti IM(1), Rosset D(2), Col Cozzari G(3), da Fonseca D(2), Deruelle C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut, USA.
(2)Institut de Neurosciences de la Timone, Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique - Aix-Marseille Université, France.
(3)Department of Psychology, Aix-Marseille Université, France.

In the embodied cognition framework, sensory, motor and emotional experiences 
are encoded along with sensorimotor cues from the context in which information 
was acquired. As such, representations retain an initial imprint of the manner 
in which information was acquired. The current study reports results indicating 
a lack of embodiment effects in ASD and, further, an association between 
embodiment differences and ASD symptomatology. The current results are 
consistent with an embodied account of ASD that goes beyond social experiences 
and could be driven by subtle deficits in sensorimotor coordination.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12278
PMID: 25601019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


820. Dev Sci. 2015 Mar;18(2):344-50. doi: 10.1111/desc.12248. Epub 2014 Dec 28.

Bilingualism changes children's beliefs about what is innate.

Byers-Heinlein K(1), Garcia B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Concordia University, Canada.

Young children engage in essentialist reasoning about natural kinds, believing 
that many traits are innately determined. This study investigated whether 
personal experience with second language acquisition could alter children's 
essentialist biases. In a switched-at-birth paradigm, 5- and 6-year-old 
monolingual and simultaneous bilingual children expected that a baby's native 
language, an animal's vocalizations, and an animal's physical traits would match 
those of a birth rather than of an adoptive parent. We predicted that sequential 
bilingual children, who had been exposed to a new language after age 3, would 
show greater understanding that languages are learned. Surprisingly, sequential 
bilinguals showed reduced essentialist beliefs about all traits: they were 
significantly more likely than other children to believe that human language, 
animal vocalizations, and animal physical traits would be learned through 
experience rather than innately endowed. These findings suggest that 
bilingualism in the preschool years can profoundly change children's 
essentialist biases.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12248
PMID: 25546698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


821. Dev Sci. 2015 Nov;18(6):864-76. doi: 10.1111/desc.12279. Epub 2014 Dec 20.

Constraints on statistical computations at 10 months of age: the use of 
phonological features.

Gonzalez-Gomez N(1)(2), Nazzi T(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Oxford Brookes University, UK.
(2)Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, France.
(3)CNRS (Laboratoire Psychologie de la Perception, UMR 8158), Paris, France.

Recently, several studies have argued that infants capitalize on the statistical 
properties of natural languages to acquire the linguistic structure of their 
native language, but the kinds of constraints which apply to statistical 
computations remain largely unknown. Here we explored French-learning infants' 
perceptual preference for labial-coronal (LC) words over coronal-labial words 
(CL) words (e.g. preferring bat over tab) to determine whether this phonotactic 
preference is based on the acquisition of the statistical properties of the 
input based on a single phonological feature (i.e. place of articulation), 
multiple features (i.e. place and manner of articulation), or individual 
consonant pairs. Results from four experiments revealed that infants had a 
labial-coronal bias for nasal sequences (Experiment 1) and for all plosive 
sequences (Experiments 2 and 4) but a coronal-labial bias for all fricative 
sequences (Experiments 3 and 4), independently of the frequencies of individual 
consonant pairs. These results establish for the first time that constellations 
of multiple phonological features, defining broad consonant classes, constrain 
the early acquisition of phonotactic regularities of the native language.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12279
PMID: 25530121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


822. Dev Sci. 2015 Nov;18(6):917-25. doi: 10.1111/desc.12275. Epub 2014 Dec 20.

Children infer affiliative and status relations from watching others imitate.

Over H(1), Carpenter M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Deparmtnet of Psychology, University of York, UK.
(2)School of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of St Andrews, UK.
(3)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.

We investigated whether young children are able to infer affiliative relations 
and relative status from observing others' imitative interactions. Children 
watched videos showing one individual imitating another and were asked about the 
relationship between those individuals. Experiment 1 showed that 5-year-olds 
assume that individuals imitate people they like. Experiment 2 showed that 
children of the same age assume that an individual who imitates is relatively 
lower in status. Thus, although there are many advantages to imitating others, 
there may also be reputational costs. Younger children, 4-year-olds, did not 
reliably make either inference. Taken together, these experiments demonstrate 
that imitation conveys valuable information about third party relationships and 
that, at least by the age of 5, children are able to use this information in 
order to infer who is allied with whom and who is dominant over whom. In doing 
so, they add a new dimension to our understanding of the role of imitation in 
human social life.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12275
PMID: 25529928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


823. Dev Sci. 2015 Nov;18(6):1014-24. doi: 10.1111/desc.12274. Epub 2014 Dec 20.

Preschool children favor copying a successful individual over an unsuccessful 
group.

Wilks M(1), Collier-Baker E(1), Nielsen M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Early Cognitive Development Centre, School of Psychology, University of 
Queensland, Australia.
(2)School of Applied Human Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa.

The human aptitude for imitation and social learning underpins our advanced 
cultural practices. While social learning is a valuable evolutionary survival 
strategy, blind copying does not necessarily facilitate survival. Copying from 
the majority allows individuals to make rapid judgments on the value of a trait, 
based on its frequency. This is known as the majority bias: an individual's 
tendency to copy the behavior elicited by the largest number of individuals in a 
population. An alternative approach is to follow those who are the most 
proficient. While there is evidence that children do show both processes, no 
study has directly pitted them against each other. To do this, in the current 
experiment 36 children aged between 4 and 5 years watched live actors 
demonstrate, as a group or individually, how to open novel puzzle boxes. 
Children exhibited a bias to the majority when group and individual methods were 
successful, but favored the individual if the group method was unsuccessful. 
Affiliating children with the unsuccessful majority group did not impact on this 
pattern.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12274
PMID: 25529854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


824. Dev Sci. 2015 Sep;18(5):703-12. doi: 10.1111/desc.12247. Epub 2014 Nov 28.

Children do not recalibrate motor-sensory temporal order after exposure to 
delayed sensory feedback.

Vercillo T(1), Burr D(2)(3), Sandini G(1), Gori M(1).

Author information:
(1)Robotics, Brain & Cognitive Sciences Department, Fondazione Istituto Italiano 
di Tecnologia, Genoa, Italy.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, University of Florence, Italy.
(3)CNR Institute of Neuroscience, Pisa, Italy.

Prolonged adaptation to delayed sensory feedback to a simple motor act (such as 
pressing a key) causes recalibration of sensory-motor synchronization, so 
instantaneous feedback appears to precede the motor act that caused it (Stetson, 
Cui, Montague & Eagleman, 2006). We investigated whether similar recalibration 
occurs in school-age children. Although plasticity may be expected to be even 
greater in children than in adults, we found no evidence of recalibration in 
children aged 8-11 years. Subjects adapted to delayed feedback for 100 trials, 
intermittently pressing a key that caused a tone to sound after a 200 ms delay. 
During the test phase, subjects responded to a visual cue by pressing a key, 
which triggered a tone to be played at variable intervals before or after the 
keypress. Subjects judged whether the tone preceded or followed the keypress, 
yielding psychometric functions estimating the delay when they perceived the 
tone to be synchronous with the action. The psychometric functions also gave an 
estimate of the precision of the temporal order judgment. In agreement with 
previous studies, adaptation caused a shift in perceived synchrony in adults, so 
the keypress appeared to trail behind the auditory feedback, implying 
sensory-motor recalibration. However, school children of 8 to 11 years showed no 
measureable adaptation of perceived simultaneity, even after adaptation with 500 
ms lags. Importantly, precision in the simultaneity task also improved with age, 
and this developmental trend correlated strongly with the magnitude of 
recalibration. This suggests that lack of recalibration of sensory-motor 
simultaneity after adaptation in school-age children is related to their poor 
precision in temporal order judgments. To test this idea we measured 
recalibration in adult subjects with auditory noise added to the stimuli (which 
hampered temporal precision). Under these conditions, recalibration was greatly 
reduced, with the magnitude of recalibration strongly correlating with temporal 
precision.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12247
PMCID: PMC4487828
PMID: 25444457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


825. Dev Sci. 2015 Sep;18(5):785-98. doi: 10.1111/desc.12245. Epub 2014 Nov 29.

The brain adapts to orthography with experience: evidence from English and 
Chinese.

Cao F(1), Brennan C(2), Booth JR(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Communicative Sciences and Disorders, Michigan State 
University, USA.
(2)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northwestern University, 
USA.
(3)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorder, University of Texas at 
Austin, USA.

Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), we examined the process of 
language specialization in the brain by comparing developmental changes in two 
contrastive orthographies: Chinese and English. In a visual word rhyming 
judgment task, we found a significant interaction between age and language in 
left inferior parietal lobule and left superior temporal gyrus, which was due to 
greater developmental increases in English than in Chinese. Moreover, we found 
that higher skill only in English children was correlated with greater 
activation in left inferior parietal lobule. These findings suggest that the 
regions associated with phonological processing are essential in English reading 
development. We also found greater developmental increases in English than in 
Chinese in left inferior temporal gyrus, suggesting refinement of this region 
for fine-grained word form recognition. In contrast, greater developmental 
increases in Chinese than in English were found in right middle occipital gyrus, 
suggesting the importance of holistic visual-orthographic analysis in Chinese 
reading acquisition. Our results suggest that the brain adapts to the special 
features of the orthography by engaging relevant brain regions to a greater 
degree over development.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12245
PMCID: PMC4934123
PMID: 25444089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


826. Dev Sci. 2015 Jul;18(4):556-68. doi: 10.1111/desc.12239. Epub 2014 Nov 28.

Ensemble perception of size in 4-5-year-old children.

Sweeny TD(1), Wurnitsch N(2), Gopnik A(2), Whitney D(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Denver, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of California - Berkeley, USA.
(3)Vision Science Group, University of California - Berkeley, USA.

Groups of objects are nearly everywhere we look. Adults can perceive and 
understand the 'gist' of multiple objects at once, engaging ensemble-coding 
mechanisms that summarize a group's overall appearance. Are these 
group-perception mechanisms in place early in childhood? Here, we provide the 
first evidence that 4-5-year-old children use ensemble coding to perceive the 
average size of a group of objects. Children viewed a pair of trees, with each 
containing a group of differently sized oranges. We found that, in order to 
determine which tree had the larger oranges overall, children integrated the 
sizes of multiple oranges into ensemble representations. This pooling occurred 
rapidly, and it occurred despite conflicting information from numerosity, 
continuous extent, density, and contrast. An ideal observer analysis showed that 
although children's integration mechanisms are sensitive, they are not yet as 
efficient as adults'. Overall, our results provide a new insight into the way 
children see and understand the environment, and they illustrate the fundamental 
nature of ensemble coding in visual perception.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12239
PMCID: PMC5282927
PMID: 25442844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


827. Dev Sci. 2015 Nov;18(6):894-908. doi: 10.1111/desc.12266. Epub 2014 Nov 29.

Core geometry in perspective.

Dillon MR(1), Spelke ES(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Harvard University, USA.

Research on animals, infants, children, and adults provides evidence that 
distinct cognitive systems underlie navigation and object recognition. Here we 
examine whether and how these systems interact when children interpret 2D 
edge-based perspectival line drawings of scenes and objects. Such drawings serve 
as symbols early in development, and they preserve scene and object geometry 
from canonical points of view. Young children show limits when using geometry 
both in non-symbolic tasks and in symbolic map tasks that present 3D contexts 
from unusual, unfamiliar points of view. When presented with the familiar 
viewpoints in perspectival line drawings, however, do children engage more 
integrated geometric representations? In three experiments, children 
successfully interpreted line drawings with respect to their depicted scene or 
object. Nevertheless, children recruited distinct processes when navigating 
based on the information in these drawings, and these processes depended on the 
context in which the drawings were presented. These results suggest that 
children are flexible but limited in using geometric information to form 
integrated representations of scenes and objects, even when interpreting spatial 
symbols that are highly familiar and faithful renditions of the visual world.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12266
PMCID: PMC4529807
PMID: 25441089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


828. Dev Sci. 2015 Sep;18(5):832-41. doi: 10.1111/desc.12258. Epub 2014 Nov 29.

The late positive potential predicts emotion regulation strategy use in 
school-aged children concurrently and two years later.

Babkirk S(1)(2), Rios V(2), Dennis TA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)The Graduate Center, The City University of New York, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Hunter College, The City University of New York, 
USA.

The ability to use cognitive emotion regulation strategies such as reappraisal 
may be a core component of emotional competence across development, but due to 
methodological challenges in measuring such strategies, they are rarely studied 
in young children. One neurophysiological measure, the late positive potential 
(LPP), has been examined in response to reappraisal as a potential 
neurosignature for emotion regulatory capacity in adults. The association 
between the LPP and emotion regulatory capacity in children is unknown. The 
present study examined whether the LPP during reappraisal could predict greater 
observed adaptive emotion regulation strategy use in school-aged children over a 
two-year period. Thirty-two 5- to 7-year-olds participated in two identical lab 
visits spaced two years apart. EEG was continuously recorded during a 
computerized reappraisal task in which children viewed unpleasant images paired 
with either reappraisal or negative stories. Next they completed a disappointing 
and a frustrating task during which emotion regulation strategies were observed. 
As predicted, children who showed reappraisal-induced reductions in the LPP at 
the first assessment used significantly more adaptive ER strategies concurrently 
and two years later. These findings provide observation-based evidence that the 
LPP may be a viable neurosignature for emotion regulatory capacity in children.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12258
PMCID: PMC4449331
PMID: 25438825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


829. Dev Sci. 2015 Sep;18(5):736-50. doi: 10.1111/desc.12251. Epub 2014 Nov 28.

Active vision in passive locomotion: real-world free viewing in infants and 
adults.

Kretch KS(1), Adolph KE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, New York University, USA.

Visual exploration in infants and adults has been studied using two very 
different paradigms: free viewing of flat screen displays in desk-mounted 
eye-tracking studies and real-world visual guidance of action in head-mounted 
eye-tracking studies. To test whether classic findings from screen-based studies 
generalize to real-world visual exploration and to compare natural visual 
exploration in infants and adults, we tested observers in a new paradigm that 
combines critical aspects of both previous techniques: free viewing during 
real-world visual exploration. Mothers and their 9-month-old infants wore 
head-mounted eye trackers while mothers carried their infants in a 
forward-facing infant carrier through a series of indoor hallways. Demands for 
visual guidance of action were minimal in mothers and absent for infants, so 
both engaged in free viewing while moving through the environment. Similar to 
screen-based studies, during free viewing in the real world low-level saliency 
was related to gaze direction. In contrast to screen-based studies, only infants 
- not adults - were biased to look at people, participants of both ages did not 
show a classic center bias, and mothers and infants did not display high levels 
of inter-observer consistency. Results indicate that several aspects of visual 
exploration of a flat screen display do not generalize to visual exploration in 
the real world.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12251
PMCID: PMC4447601
PMID: 25438618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


830. Dev Sci. 2015 Jul;18(4):599-613. doi: 10.1111/desc.12236. Epub 2014 Oct 5.

The development of route learning in Down syndrome, Williams syndrome and 
typical development: investigations with virtual environments.

Purser HR(1), Farran EK(2), Courbois Y(3), Lemahieu A(3), Sockeel P(3), Mellier 
D(4), Blades M(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Nottingham, UK.
(2)Department of Psychology and Human Development, Institute of Education, 
University of London, UK.
(3)Laboratoire PSITEC (EA 4072), UDL3, Université Lille Nord de France, France.
(4)Laboratoire PSY-NCA (EA 4306), Université de Rouen, France.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Sheffield, UK.

The ability to navigate new environments has a significant impact on the daily 
life and independence of people with learning difficulties. The aims of this 
study were to investigate the development of route learning in Down syndrome (N 
= 50), Williams syndrome (N = 19), and typically developing children between 5 
and 11 years old (N = 108); to investigate use of landmarks; and to relate 
cognitive functions to route-learning ability in these groups. Overall, measures 
of attention and long-term memory were strongly associated with route learning, 
even once non-verbal ability was controlled for. All of the groups, including 5- 
to 6-year-old TD children, demonstrated the ability to make use of all landmark 
types to aid route learning; those near junctions, those further from junctions, 
and also distant landmarks (e.g. church spire, radio mast). Individuals with WS 
performed better than a matched subset of TD children on more difficult routes; 
we suggest that this is supported by relatively strong visual feature 
recognition in the disorder. Participants with DS who had relatively high levels 
of non-verbal ability performed at a similar level to TD participants.

© 2014 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12236
PMID: 25284087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


831. Dev Sci. 2015 May;18(3):420-35. doi: 10.1111/desc.12227. Epub 2014 Sep 1.

The impact of culture on physiological processes of emotion regulation: a 
comparison of US and Chinese preschoolers.

Grabell AS(1), Olson SL, Miller AL, Kessler DA, Felt B, Kaciroti N, Wang L, 
Tardif T.

Author information:
(1)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

Cognitive determinants of emotion regulation, such as effortful control, have 
been hypothesized to modulate young children's physiological response to 
emotional stress. It is unknown, however, whether this model of emotion 
regulation generalizes across Western and non-Western cultures. The current 
study examined the relation between both behavioral and questionnaire measures 
of effortful control and densely sampled, stress-induced cortisol trajectories 
in U.S. and Chinese preschoolers. Participants were 3- to 5- year-old children 
recruited from the United States (N = 57) and Beijing, China (N = 60). 
Consistent with our hypothesis, U.S. children showed a significant negative 
relation between maternal-rated inhibitory control and both cortisol reactivity 
and recovery. However, this was not replicated in the Chinese sample. Children 
in China showed a significant positive relation between maternal-rated 
attentional focusing and cortisol reactivity that was not seen in the U.S. 
Results suggest that children who reside in Western and non-Western cultures 
have different predictors of their emotion-related stress response.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12227
PMID: 25175305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


832. Dev Sci. 2015 May;18(3):373-88. doi: 10.1111/desc.12219. Epub 2014 Aug 28.

Individual differences in the shape bias in preschool children with specific 
language impairment and typical language development: theoretical and clinical 
implications.

Collisson BA(1), Grela B, Spaulding T, Rueckl JG, Magnuson JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Calgary, Canada.

We investigated whether preschool children with specific language impairment 
(SLI) exhibit the shape bias in word learning: the bias to generalize based on 
shape rather than size, color, or texture in an object naming context ('This is 
a wek; find another wek') but not in a non-naming similarity classification 
context ('See this? Which one goes with this one?'). Fifty-four preschool 
children (16 with SLI, 16 children with typical language [TL] in an equated 
control group, and 22 additional children with TL included in individual 
differences analyses but not group comparisons) completed a battery of 
linguistic and cognitive assessments and two experiments. In Experiment 1, 
children made generalization choices in object naming and similarity 
classification contexts on separate days, from options similar to a target 
object in shape, color, or texture. On average, TL children exhibited the shape 
bias in an object naming context, but children with SLI did not. In Experiment 
2, we tested whether the failure to exhibit the shape bias might be linked to 
ability to detect systematicities in the visual domain. Experiment 2 supported 
this hypothesis, in that children with SLI failed to learn simple paired visual 
associations that were readily learned by children with TL. Analyses of 
individual differences in the two studies revealed that visual paired-associate 
learning predicted degree of shape bias in children with SLI and TL better than 
any other measure of nonverbal intelligence or standard assessments of language 
ability. We discuss theoretical and clinical implications.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12219
PMID: 25164789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


833. Dev Sci. 2015 May;18(3):469-83. doi: 10.1111/desc.12228. Epub 2014 Aug 25.

The development of race-based perceptual categorization: skin color dominates 
early category judgments.

Dunham Y(1), Stepanova EV, Dotsch R, Todorov A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, USA.

Prior research on the development of race-based categorization has concluded 
that children understand the perceptual basis of race categories from as early 
as age 4 (e.g. Aboud, 1988). However, such work has rarely separated the 
influence of skin color from other physiognomic features considered by adults to 
be diagnostic of race categories. In two studies focusing on Black-White race 
categorization judgments in children between the ages of 4 and 9, as well as in 
adults, we find that categorization decisions in early childhood are determined 
almost entirely by attention to skin color, with attention to other physiognomic 
features exerting only a small influence on judgments as late as middle 
childhood. We further find that when skin color cues are largely eliminated from 
the stimuli, adults readily shift almost entirely to focus on other physiognomic 
features. However, 6- and 8-year-old children show only a limited ability to 
shift attention to facial physiognomy and so perform poorly on the task. These 
results demonstrate that attention to 'race' in younger children is better 
conceptualized as attention to skin color, inviting a reinterpretation of past 
work focusing on children's race-related cognition.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12228
PMID: 25154647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


834. Dev Sci. 2015 May;18(3):436-51. doi: 10.1111/desc.12221. Epub 2014 Aug 21.

Longitudinal study of perception of structured optic flow and random visual 
motion in infants using high-density EEG.

Agyei SB(1), Holth M, van der Weel FR, van der Meer AL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 
Norway.

Electroencephalogram (EEG) was used in infants at 3-4 months and 11-12 months to 
longitudinally study brain electrical activity as the infants were exposed to 
structured forwards and reversed optic flow, and non-structured random visual 
motion. Analyses of visual evoked potential (VEP) and temporal spectral 
evolution (TSE, time-dependent amplitude changes) were performed on EEG data 
recorded with a 128-channel sensor array. VEP results showed infants to 
significantly differentiate between the radial motion conditions, but only at 
11-12 months where they showed shortest latency for forwards optic flow and 
longest latency for random visual motion. When the TSE results of the motion 
conditions were compared with those of a static non-flow dot pattern, infants at 
3-4 and 11-12 months both showed significant differences in induced activity. A 
decrease in amplitudes at 5-7 Hz was observed as desynchronized theta-band 
activity at both 3-4 and 11-12 months, while an increase in amplitudes at 9-13 
Hz was observed as synchronized alpha-band activity only at 11-12 months. It was 
concluded that brain electrical activities related to visual motion perception 
change during the first year of life, and these changes can be observed both in 
the VEP and induced activities of EEG. With adequate neurobiological development 
and locomotor experience infants around 1 year of age rely, more so than when 
they were younger, on structured optic flow and show a more adult-like 
specialization for motion where faster oscillating cell assemblies have fewer 
but more specialized neurons, resulting in improved visual motion perception.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12221
PMID: 25145649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


835. Dev Sci. 2014 Jul;17(4):612-20. doi: 10.1111/desc.12139.

Additive effects of social and non-social attention during infancy relate to 
later autism spectrum disorder.

Bedford R, Pickles A, Gliga T, Elsabbagh M, Charman T, Johnson MH; BASIS Team.

Emerging findings from studies with infants at familial high risk for autism 
spectrum disorder (ASD), owing to an older sibling with a diagnosis, suggest 
that those who go on to develop ASD show early impairments in the processing of 
stimuli with both social and non-social content. Although ASD is defined by 
social-communication impairments and restricted and repetitive behaviours, the 
majority of cognitive theories of ASD posit a single underlying factor, which 
over development has secondary effects across domains. This is the first 
high-risk study to statistically differentiate theoretical models of the 
development of ASD in high-risk siblings using multiple risk factors. We 
examined the prediction of ASD outcome by attention to social and non-social 
stimuli: gaze following and attentional disengagement assessed at 13 months in 
low-risk controls and high-risk ASD infants (who were subsequently diagnosed 
with ASD at 3 years). When included in the same regression model, these 13-month 
measures independently predicted ASD outcome at 3 years of age. The data were 
best described by an additive model, suggesting that non-social attention, 
disengagement, and social attention as evidenced by gaze following, have a 
cumulative impact on ASD risk. These data argue against cognitive theories of 
ASD which propose that a single underlying factor has cascading effects across 
early development leading to an ASD outcome, and support multiple impairment 
models of ASD that are more consistent with recent genetic and neurobiological 
evidence.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12139
PMCID: PMC4253134
PMID: 25089324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


836. Dev Sci. 2014 Jul;17(4):537-52. doi: 10.1111/desc.12140.

Developmental dissociation in the neural responses to simple multiplication and 
subtraction problems.

Prado J, Mutreja R, Booth JR.

Mastering single-digit arithmetic during school years is commonly thought to 
depend upon an increasing reliance on verbally memorized facts. An alternative 
model, however, posits that fluency in single-digit arithmetic might also be 
achieved via the increasing use of efficient calculation procedures. To test 
between these hypotheses, we used a cross-sectional design to measure the neural 
activity associated with single-digit subtraction and multiplication in 34 
children from 2nd to 7th grade. The neural correlates of language and numerical 
processing were also identified in each child via localizer scans. Although 
multiplication and subtraction were undistinguishable in terms of behavior, we 
found a striking developmental dissociation in their neural correlates. First, 
we observed grade-related increases of activity for multiplication, but not for 
subtraction, in a language-related region of the left temporal cortex. Second, 
we found grade-related increases of activity for subtraction, but not for 
multiplication, in a region of the right parietal cortex involved in the 
procedural manipulation of numerical quantities. The present results suggest 
that fluency in simple arithmetic in children may be achieved by both increasing 
reliance on verbal retrieval and by greater use of efficient quantity-based 
procedures, depending on the operation.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12140
PMCID: PMC4122319
PMID: 25089323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


837. Dev Sci. 2014 Jul;17(4):506-24. doi: 10.1111/desc.12144.

Cognitive components of a mathematical processing network in 9-year-old 
children.

Szűcs D, Devine A, Soltesz F, Nobes A, Gabriel F.

We determined how various cognitive abilities, including several measures of a 
proposed domain-specific number sense, relate to mathematical competence in 
nearly 100 9-year-old children with normal reading skill. Results are consistent 
with an extended number processing network and suggest that important processing 
nodes of this network are phonological processing, verbal knowledge, 
visuo-spatial short-term and working memory, spatial ability and general 
executive functioning. The model was highly specific to predicting arithmetic 
performance. There were no strong relations between mathematical achievement and 
verbal short-term and working memory, sustained attention, response inhibition, 
finger knowledge and symbolic number comparison performance. Non-verbal 
intelligence measures were also non-significant predictors when added to our 
model. Number sense variables were non-significant predictors in the model and 
they were also non-significant predictors when entered into regression analysis 
with only a single visuo-spatial WM measure. Number sense variables were 
predicted by sustained attention. Results support a network theory of 
mathematical competence in primary school children and falsify the importance of 
a proposed modular 'number sense'. We suggest an 'executive memory function 
centric' model of mathematical processing. Mapping a complex processing network 
requires that studies consider the complex predictor space of mathematics rather 
than just focusing on a single or a few explanatory factors.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12144
PMCID: PMC4253132
PMID: 25089322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


838. Dev Sci. 2015 May;18(3):484-94. doi: 10.1111/desc.12223. Epub 2014 Jul 28.

Institutional care and iron deficiency increase ADHD symptomology and lower IQ 
2.5-5 years post-adoption.

Doom JR(1), Georgieff MK, Gunnar MR.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Child Development, University of Minnesota, USA; Center for 
Neurobehavioral Development, University of Minnesota, USA.

Increased ADHD symptomology and lower IQ have been reported in internationally 
adopted (IA) children compared to non-adopted peers (Hostinar, Stellern, 
Schaefer, Carlson & Gunnar, 2012; Kreppner, O'Connor & Rutter, 2001). However, 
it is unclear whether these outcomes are due to institutional deprivation 
specifically or to co-occurring micronutrient deficiencies that disrupt brain 
development (Fuglestad, Rao & Georgieff, 2008b). In this study, IA children were 
compared to children raised in their biological families to examine differences 
in ADHD symptomology and IQ 2.5-5 years post-adoption and to assess the 
contributions of iron deficiency (ID) and duration of deprivation to these 
cognitive outcomes. ADHD symptoms (parent- and experimenter-reported) and IQ 
were evaluated in 88 IA (M = 62.1 months, SD = 2.4) and 35 non-adopted children 
(M = 61.4 months, SD = 1.6). IA children were assessed 29-64 months 
post-adoption (M = 41.9 months, SD = 10.2). ID was assessed during the initial 
post-adoption medical visit in 69 children, and children were classified into 
four groups by iron status, ranging from normal to ID anemia (most severe). IA 
children had greater ADHD symptomology, p < .01, and lower IQ, p = .001, than 
non-adopted children. Within the IA group, children with more severe ID at 
adoption had greater ADHD symptomology, r(69) = 0.40, p = .001, and lower IQ, 
r(68) = -0.28, p < .05. Duration of institutional care was positively correlated 
with ADHD symptoms, r(86) = .28, p < .01, but not IQ, r(85) = -.08, p = .52. 
Longitudinal results indicate improvement in IQ from 12 months post-adoption to 
age 5 for children with greater ID severity at adoption and longer duration of 
institutional care but no improvement in ADHD symptoms. These results signify 
continuing effects of early deprivation and ID on ADHD symptoms and IQ years 
after adoption. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vUFDAS3DD1c.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12223
PMCID: PMC4309749
PMID: 25070881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


839. Dev Sci. 2015 May;18(3):389-403. doi: 10.1111/desc.12220. Epub 2014 Jul 28.

Error-monitoring in response to social stimuli in individuals with 
higher-functioning Autism Spectrum Disorder.

McMahon CM(1), Henderson HA.

Author information:
(1)3C Institute, USA.

Error-monitoring, or the ability to recognize one's mistakes and implement 
behavioral changes to prevent further mistakes, may be impaired in individuals 
with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Children and adolescents (ages 9-19) with 
ASD (n = 42) and typical development (n = 42) completed two face processing 
tasks that required discrimination of either the gender or affect of 
standardized face stimuli. Post-error slowing and the difference in 
Error-Related Negativity amplitude between correct and incorrect responses 
(ERNdiff ) were used to index error-monitoring ability. Overall, ERNdiff 
increased with age. On the Gender Task, individuals with ASD had a smaller 
ERNdiff than individuals with typical development; however, on the Affect Task, 
there were no significant diagnostic group differences on ERNdiff . Individuals 
with ASD may have ERN amplitudes similar to those observed in individuals with 
typical development in more social contexts compared to less social contexts due 
to greater consequences for errors, more effortful processing, and/or reduced 
processing efficiency in these contexts. Across all participants, more 
post-error slowing on the Affect Task was associated with better social 
cognitive skills.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12220
PMCID: PMC4309753
PMID: 25066088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


840. Dev Sci. 2015 Mar;18(2):335-43. doi: 10.1111/desc.12222. Epub 2014 Jul 23.

Children and adults both see 'pirates' in 'parties': letter-position effects for 
developing readers and skilled adult readers.

Paterson KB(1), Read J, McGowan VA, Jordan TR.

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, Biological Sciences and Psychology, University of 
Leicester, UK.

Developing readers often make anagrammatical errors (e.g. misreading pirates as 
parties), suggesting they use letter position flexibly during word recognition. 
However, while it is widely assumed that the occurrence of these errors 
decreases with increases in reading skill, empirical evidence to support this 
distinction is lacking. Accordingly, we compared the performance of developing 
child readers (aged 8-10 years) against the end-state performance of skilled 
adult readers in a timed naming task, employing anagrams used previously in this 
area of research. Moreover, to explore the use of letter position by developing 
readers and skilled adult readers more fully, we used anagrams which, to form 
another word, required letter transpositions over only interior letter 
positions, or both interior and exterior letter positions. The patterns of 
effects across these two anagram types for the two groups of readers were very 
similar. In particular, both groups showed similarly slowed response times (and 
developing readers increased errors) for anagrams requiring only interior letter 
transpositions but not for anagrams that required exterior letter 
transpositions. This similarity in the naming performance of developing readers 
and skilled adult readers suggests that the end-state skilled use of letter 
position is established earlier during reading development than is widely 
assumed.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12222
PMID: 25055930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


841. Dev Sci. 2015 Mar;18(2):314-26. doi: 10.1111/desc.12215. Epub 2014 Jul 22.

Continuity and change in children's longitudinal neural responses to numbers.

Emerson RW(1), Cantlon JF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester, New York, 
USA.

Human children possess the ability to approximate numerical quantity nonverbally 
from a young age. Over the course of early childhood, children develop 
increasingly precise representations of numerical values, including a symbolic 
number system that allows them to conceive of numerical information as Arabic 
numerals or number words. Functional brain imaging studies of adults report that 
activity in bilateral regions of the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) represents a key 
neural correlate of numerical cognition. Developmental neuroimaging studies 
indicate that the right IPS develops its number-related neural response profile 
more rapidly than the left IPS during early childhood. One prediction that can 
be derived from previous findings is that there is longitudinal continuity in 
the number-related neural responses of the right IPS over development while the 
development of the left IPS depends on the acquisition of numerical skills. We 
tested this hypothesis using fMRI in a longitudinal design with children ages 4 
to 9. We found that neural responses in the right IPS are correlated over a 
1-2-year period in young children whereas left IPS responses change 
systematically as a function of children's numerical discrimination acuity. The 
data are consistent with the hypothesis that functional properties of the right 
IPS in numerical processing are stable over early childhood whereas the 
functions of the left IPS are dynamically modulated by the development of 
numerical skills.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12215
PMCID: PMC4303560
PMID: 25051893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


842. Dev Sci. 2015 Mar;18(2):232-42. doi: 10.1111/desc.12206. Epub 2014 Jul 9.

Two-year-old children but not domestic dogs understand communicative intentions 
without language, gestures, or gaze.

Moore R(1), Mueller B, Kaminski J, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Comparative Psychology, Max Planck Institute 
for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany; Berlin School of Mind and 
Brain, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany.

Infants can see someone pointing to one of two buckets and infer that the toy 
they are seeking is hidden inside. Great apes do not succeed in this task, but, 
surprisingly, domestic dogs do. However, whether children and dogs understand 
these communicative acts in the same way is not yet known. To test this 
possibility, an experimenter did not point, look, or extend any part of her body 
towards either bucket, but instead lifted and shook one via a centrally pulled 
rope. She did this either intentionally or accidentally, and did or did not 
address her act to the subject using ostensive cues. Young 2-year-old children 
but not dogs understood the experimenter's act in intentional conditions. While 
ostensive pulling of the rope made no difference to children's success, it 
actually hindered dogs' performance. We conclude that while human children may 
be capable of inferring communicative intent from a wide variety actions, so 
long as these actions are performed intentionally, dogs are likely to be less 
flexible in this respect. Their understanding of communicative intention may be 
more dependent upon bodily markers of communicative intent, including gaze, 
orientation, extended limbs, and vocalizations. This may be because humans have 
come under selective pressure to develop skills for communicating with absent 
interlocutors - where bodily co-presence is not possible.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12206
PMID: 25041186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


843. Dev Sci. 2015 Mar;18(2):206-18. doi: 10.1111/desc.12205. Epub 2014 Jul 14.

A new twist on old ideas: how sitting reorients crawlers.

Soska KC(1), Robinson SR, Adolph KE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Florida International University, USA.

Traditionally, crawling and sitting are considered distinct motor behaviors with 
different postures and functions. Ten- to 12-month-old infants were observed in 
the laboratory or in their homes while being coaxed to crawl continuously over 
long, straight walkways (Study 1; N = 20) and during spontaneous crawling during 
free play (Study 2; N = 20). In every context, infants stopped crawling to sit 
3-6 times per minute. Transitions from crawling to sitting frequently turned 
infants' bodies away from the direction of heading; subsequent transitions back 
to crawling were offset by as much as 180° from the original direction of 
heading. Apparently, body reorientations result from the biomechanics of 
transitioning between crawling and sitting. Findings indicate that sustained, 
linear crawling is likely an epiphenomenon of how gait is studied in standard 
paradigms. Postural transitions between crawling and sitting are ubiquitous and 
can represent a functional unit of action. These transitions and the 
accompanying body reorientations likely have cascading effects for infants' 
exploration, visual perception, and spatial cognition.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12205
PMCID: PMC4294991
PMID: 25041056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


844. Dev Sci. 2015 Jan;18(1):146-54. doi: 10.1111/desc.12202. Epub 2014 Jul 1.

Sentence repetition is a measure of children's language skills rather than 
working memory limitations.

Klem M(1), Melby-Lervåg M, Hagtvet B, Lyster SA, Gustafsson JE, Hulme C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Special Needs Education, University of Oslo, Norway.

Sentence repetition tasks are widely used in the diagnosis and assessment of 
children with language difficulties. This paper seeks to clarify the nature of 
sentence repetition tasks and their relationship to other language skills. We 
present the results from a 2-year longitudinal study of 216 children. Children 
were assessed on measures of sentence repetition, vocabulary knowledge and 
grammatical skills three times at approximately yearly intervals starting at age 
4. Sentence repetition was not a unique longitudinal predictor of the growth of 
language skills. A unidimensional language latent factor (defined by sentence 
repetition, vocabulary knowledge and grammatical skills) provided an excellent 
fit to the data, and language abilities showed a high degree of longitudinal 
stability. Sentence repetition is best seen as a reflection of an underlying 
language ability factor rather than as a measure of a separate construct with a 
specific role in language processing. Sentence repetition appears to be a 
valuable tool for language assessment because it draws upon a wide range of 
language processing skills.

© 2014 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12202
PMCID: PMC4309482
PMID: 24986395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


845. Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):809-25. doi: 10.1111/desc.12159. Epub 2014 Jun 20.

Staring us in the face? An embodied theory of innate face preference.

Wilkinson N(1), Paikan A, Gredebäck G, Rea F, Metta G.

Author information:
(1)iCub Facility, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova, Italy.

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):831-2.
    Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):826-7.
    Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):828-30.

Human expertise in face perception grows over development, but even within 
minutes of birth, infants exhibit an extraordinary sensitivity to face-like 
stimuli. The dominant theory accounts for innate face detection by proposing 
that the neonate brain contains an innate face detection device, dubbed 
'Conspec'. Newborn face preference has been promoted as some of the strongest 
evidence for innate knowledge, and forms a canonical stage for the modern form 
of the nature-nurture debate in psychology. Interpretation of newborn face 
preference results has concentrated on monocular stimulus properties, with 
little mention or focused investigation of potential binocular involvement. 
However, the question of whether and how newborns integrate the binocular visual 
streams bears directly on the generation of observable visual preferences. In 
this theoretical paper, we employ a synthetic approach utilizing robotic and 
computational models to draw together the threads of binocular integration and 
face preference in newborns, and demonstrate cases where the former may explain 
the latter. We suggest that a system-level view considering the binocular 
embodiment of newborn vision may offer a mutually satisfying resolution to some 
long-running arguments in the polarizing debate surrounding the existence and 
causal structure of newborns' 'innate knowledge' of faces.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12159
PMID: 24946990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


846. Dev Sci. 2015 Jan;18(1):132-45. doi: 10.1111/desc.12197. Epub 2014 Jun 18.

Knowledge cannot explain the developmental growth of working memory capacity.

Cowan N(1), Ricker TJ, Clark KM, Hinrichs GA, Glass BA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Missouri, USA.

According to some views of cognitive growth, the development of working memory 
capacity can account for increases in the complexity of cognition. It has been 
difficult to ascertain, though, that there actually is developmental growth in 
capacity that cannot be attributed to other developing factors. Here we assess 
the role of item familiarity. We document developmental increases in working 
memory for visual arrays of English letters versus unfamiliar characters. 
Although letter knowledge played a special role in development between the ages 
of 6 and 8 years, children with adequate letter knowledge showed practically the 
same developmental growth in normalized functions for letters and unfamiliar 
characters. The results contribute to a growing body of evidence that the 
developmental improvement in working memory does not wholly stem from supporting 
processes such as encoding, mnemonic strategies, and knowledge. A video abstract 
is available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LJdqErLR2Hs&feature=youtu.be.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12197
PMCID: PMC4270959
PMID: 24942111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


847. Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):1029-41. doi: 10.1111/desc.12191. Epub 2014 Jun 9.

Kin rejection: social signals, neural response and perceived distress during 
social exclusion.

Sreekrishnan A(1), Herrera TA, Wu J, Borelli JL, White LO, Rutherford HJ, Mayes 
LC, Crowley MJ.

Author information:
(1)Yale Child Study Center, Yale University, USA.

Across species, kin bond together to promote survival. We sought to understand 
the dyadic effect of exclusion by kin (as opposed to non-kin strangers) on brain 
activity of the mother and her child and their subjective distress. To this end, 
we probed mother-child relationships with a computerized ball-toss game 
Cyberball. When excluded by one another, rather than by a stranger, both mothers 
and children exhibited a significantly pronounced frontal P2. Moreover, upon kin 
rejection versus stranger rejection, both mothers and children showed 
incremented left frontal positive slow waves for rejection events. Children 
reported more distress upon exclusion than their own mothers. Similar to past 
work, relatively augmented negative frontal slow wave activity predicted greater 
self-reported ostracism distress. This effect, generalized to the P2, was 
limited to mother- or child-rejection by kin, with comparable magnitude of 
effect across kin identity (mothers vs. children). For both mothers and 
children, the frontal P2 peak was significantly pronounced for kin rejection 
versus stranger rejection. Taken together, our results document the rapid 
categorization of social signals as kin relevant and the specificity of early 
and late neural markers for predicting felt ostracism.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12191
PMCID: PMC4211999
PMID: 24909389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


848. Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):935-43. doi: 10.1111/desc.12184. Epub 2014 May 26.

Effects of posture on tactile localization by 4 years of age are modulated by 
sight of the hands: evidence for an early acquired external spatial frame of 
reference for touch.

Begum Ali J(1), Cowie D, Bremner AJ.

Author information:
(1)Sensorimotor Development Research Unit, Department of Psychology, Goldsmiths, 
University of London, UK.

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):946-7.
    Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):944-5.

Adults show a deficit in their ability to localize tactile stimuli to their 
hands when their arms are in the less familiar, crossed posture. It is thought 
that this 'crossed-hands deficit' arises due to a conflict between the 
anatomical and external spatial frames of reference within which touches can be 
encoded. The ability to localize a single tactile stimulus applied to one of the 
two hands across uncrossed-hands and crossed-hands postures was investigated in 
typically developing children (aged 4 to 6 years). The effect of posture was 
also compared across conditions in which children did, or did not, have visual 
information about current hand posture. All children, including the 4-year-olds, 
demonstrated the crossed-hands deficit when they did not have sight of hand 
posture, suggesting that touch is located in an external reference frame by this 
age. In this youngest age group, when visual information about current hand 
posture was available, tactile localization performance was impaired 
specifically when the children's hands were uncrossed. We propose that this may 
be due to an early difficulty with integrating visual representations of the 
hand within the body schema.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12184
PMID: 24862627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


849. Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):1042-9. doi: 10.1111/desc.12192. Epub 2014 May 19.

Reducing an in-group bias in preschool children: the impact of moral behavior.

Hetherington C(1), Hendrickson C, Koenig M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Child Development, University of Minnesota, USA.

How impressionable are in-group biases in early childhood? Previous research 
shows that young children display robust preferences for members of their own 
social group, but also condemn those who harm others. The current study 
investigates children's evaluations of agents when their group membership and 
moral behavior conflict. After being assigned to a minimal group, 4- to 
5-year-old children either saw their in-group member behave antisocially, an 
out-group member act prosocially, or control agents, for whom moral information 
was removed. Children's explicit preference for and willingness to share with 
their in-group member was significantly attenuated in the presence of an 
antisocial in-group member, but not a prosocial out-group member. Interestingly, 
children's learning decisions were unmoved by a person's moral behavior, instead 
being consistently guided by group membership. This demonstrates that children's 
in-group bias is remarkably flexible: while moral information curbs children's 
in-group bias on social evaluations, social learning is still driven by group 
information.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12192
PMID: 24836151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


850. Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):872-9. doi: 10.1111/desc.12170. Epub 2014 May 19.

Do 6-month-olds understand that speech can communicate?

Vouloumanos A(1), Martin A, Onishi KH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, New York University, USA.

Adults and 12-month-old infants recognize that even unfamiliar speech can 
communicate information between third parties, suggesting that they can separate 
the communicative function of speech from its lexical content. But do infants 
recognize that speech can communicate due to their experience understanding and 
producing language, or do they appreciate that speech is communicative earlier, 
with little such experience? We examined whether 6-month-olds recognize that 
speech can communicate information about an object. Infants watched a 
Communicator selectively grasp one of two objects (target). During test, the 
Communicator could no longer reach the objects; she turned to a Recipient and 
produced speech (a nonsense word) or non-speech (coughing). Infants looked 
longer when the Recipient selected the non-target than the target object when 
the Communicator spoke but not when she coughed - unless the Recipient had 
previously witnessed the Communicator's selective grasping of the target object. 
Our results suggest that at 6 months, with a receptive vocabulary of no more 
than a handful of commonly used words, infants possess some abstract 
understanding of the communicative function of speech. This understanding may 
provide an early mechanism for language and knowledge acquisition.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12170
PMID: 24835877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


851. Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):956-64. doi: 10.1111/desc.12175. Epub 2014 Apr 7.

Are bilingual children better at ignoring perceptually misleading information? A 
novel test.

Goldman MC(1), Negen J, Sarnecka BW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Sciences, University of California, Irvine, USA.

Does speaking more than one language help a child perform better on certain 
types of cognitive tasks? One possibility is that bilingualism confers either 
specific or general cognitive advantages on tasks that require selective 
attention to one dimension over another (e.g. Bialystok, ; Hilchey & Klein, ). 
Other studies have looked for such an advantage but found none (e.g. Morton & 
Harper, ; Paap & Greenberg, ). The present study compared monolingual and 
bilingual children's performance on a numerical discrimination task, which 
required children to ignore area and attend to number. Ninety-two children, ages 
3 to 6 years, were asked which of two arrays of dots had 'more dots'. Half of 
the trials were congruent, where the numerically greater array was also larger 
in total area, and half were incongruent, where the numerically greater array 
was smaller in total area. All children performed better on congruent than on 
incongruent trials. Older children were more successful than younger children at 
ignoring area in favor of number. Bilingual children did not perform differently 
from monolingual children either in number discrimination itself (i.e. 
identifying which array had more dots) or at selectively attending to number. 
The present study thus finds no evidence of a bilingual advantage on this task 
for children of this age.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12175
PMCID: PMC4188805
PMID: 24702852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


852. Dev Sci. 2015 Jan;18(1):24-37. doi: 10.1111/desc.12156. Epub 2014 Apr 7.

Visual motherese? Signal-to-noise ratios in toddler-directed television.

Wass SV(1), Smith TJ.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK.

Younger brains are noisier information processing systems; this means that 
information for younger individuals has to allow clearer differentiation between 
those aspects that are required for the processing task in hand (the 'signal') 
and those that are not (the 'noise'). We compared toddler-directed and 
adult-directed TV programmes (TotTV/ATV). We examined how low-level visual 
features (that previous research has suggested influence gaze allocation) relate 
to semantic information, namely the location of the character speaking in each 
frame. We show that this relationship differs between TotTV and ATV. First, we 
conducted Receiver Operator Characteristics analyses and found that feature 
congestion predicted speaking character location in TotTV but not ATV. Second, 
we used multiple analytical strategies to show that luminance differentials 
(flicker) predict face location more strongly in TotTV than ATV. Our results 
suggest that TotTV designers have intuited techniques for controlling toddler 
attention using low-level visual cues. The implications of these findings for 
structuring childhood learning experiences away from a screen are discussed.

© 2014 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12156
PMCID: PMC4309493
PMID: 24702791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


853. Dev Sci. 2015 Jan;18(1):50-64. doi: 10.1111/desc.12178. Epub 2014 Apr 4.

Training-induced recovery of low-level vision followed by mid-level perceptual 
improvements in developmental object and face agnosia.

Lev M(1), Gilaie-Dotan S, Gotthilf-Nezri D, Yehezkel O, Brooks JL, Perry A, 
Bentin S, Bonneh Y, Polat U.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Goldschleger Eye Research Institute, Tel Aviv 
University, Israel.

Long-term deprivation of normal visual inputs can cause perceptual impairments 
at various levels of visual function, from basic visual acuity deficits, through 
mid-level deficits such as contour integration and motion coherence, to 
high-level face and object agnosia. Yet it is unclear whether training during 
adulthood, at a post-developmental stage of the adult visual system, can 
overcome such developmental impairments. Here, we visually trained LG, a 
developmental object and face agnosic individual. Prior to training, at the age 
of 20, LG's basic and mid-level visual functions such as visual acuity, crowding 
effects, and contour integration were underdeveloped relative to normal adult 
vision, corresponding to or poorer than those of 5-6 year olds (Gilaie-Dotan, 
Perry, Bonneh, Malach & Bentin, 2009). Intensive visual training, based on 
lateral interactions, was applied for a period of 9 months. LG's directly 
trained but also untrained visual functions such as visual acuity, crowding, 
binocular stereopsis and also mid-level contour integration improved 
significantly and reached near-age-level performance, with long-term (over 4 
years) persistence. Moreover, mid-level functions that were tested post-training 
were found to be normal in LG. Some possible subtle improvement was observed in 
LG's higher-order visual functions such as object recognition and part 
integration, while LG's face perception skills have not improved thus far. These 
results suggest that corrective training at a post-developmental stage, even in 
the adult visual system, can prove effective, and its enduring effects are the 
basis for a revival of a developmental cascade that can lead to reduced 
perceptual impairments.

© 2014 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12178
PMCID: PMC4309467
PMID: 24698161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


854. Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):858-71. doi: 10.1111/desc.12169. Epub 2014 Mar 17.

Learning and consolidation of new spoken words in autism spectrum disorder.

Henderson L(1), Powell A, Gareth Gaskell M, Norbury C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of York, UK.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is characterized by rich heterogeneity in 
vocabulary knowledge and word knowledge that is not well accounted for by 
current cognitive theories. This study examines whether individual differences 
in vocabulary knowledge in ASD might be partly explained by a difficulty with 
consolidating newly learned spoken words and/or integrating them with existing 
knowledge. Nineteen boys with ASD and 19 typically developing (TD) boys matched 
on age and vocabulary knowledge showed similar improvements in recognition and 
recall of novel words (e.g. 'biscal') 24 hours after training, suggesting an 
intact ability to consolidate explicit knowledge of new spoken word forms. TD 
children showed competition effects for existing neighbors (e.g. 'biscuit') 
after 24 hours, suggesting that the new words had been integrated with existing 
knowledge over time. In contrast, children with ASD showed immediate competition 
effects that were not significant after 24 hours, suggesting a qualitative 
difference in the time course of lexical integration. These results are 
considered from the perspective of the dual-memory systems framework.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12169
PMID: 24636285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


855. Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):892-904. doi: 10.1111/desc.12165. Epub 2014 Mar 17.

123s and ABCs: developmental shifts in logarithmic-to-linear responding reflect 
fluency with sequence values.

Hurst M(1), Monahan KL, Heller E, Cordes S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Boston College, USA.

When placing numbers along a number line with endpoints 0 and 1000, children 
generally space numbers logarithmically until around the age of 7, when they 
shift to a predominantly linear pattern of responding. This developmental shift 
of responding on the number placement task has been argued to be indicative of a 
shift in the format of the underlying representation of number (Siegler & Opfer, 
). In the current study, we provide evidence from both child and adult 
participants to suggest that performance on the number placement task may not 
reflect the structure of the mental number line, but instead is a function of 
the fluency (i.e. ease) with which the individual can work with the values in 
the sequence. In Experiment 1, adult participants respond logarithmically when 
placing numbers on a line with less familiar anchors (1639 to 2897), despite 
linear responding on control tasks with standard anchors involving a similar 
range (0 to 1287) and a similar numerical magnitude (2000 to 3000). In 
Experiment 2, we show a similar developmental shift in childhood from 
logarithmic to linear responding for a non-numerical sequence with no inherent 
magnitude (the alphabet). In conclusion, we argue that the developmental trend 
towards linear behavior on the number line task is a product of successful 
strategy use and mental fluency with the values of the sequence, resulting from 
familiarity with endpoints and increased knowledge about general ordering 
principles of the sequence.A video abstract of this article can be viewed 
at:http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zg5Q2LIFk3M.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12165
PMID: 24636167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


856. Dev Sci. 2014 Jul;17(4):636-43. doi: 10.1111/desc.12157. Epub 2014 Mar 17.

Spatial metaphor in language can promote the development of cross-modal mappings 
in children.

Shayan S(1), Ozturk O, Bowerman M, Majid A.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Pitch is often described metaphorically: for example, Farsi and Turkish speakers 
use a 'thickness' metaphor (low sounds are 'thick' and high sounds are 'thin'), 
while German and English speakers use a height metaphor ('low', 'high'). This 
study examines how child and adult speakers of Farsi, Turkish, and German map 
pitch and thickness using a cross-modal association task. All groups, except for 
German children, performed significantly better than chance. German-speaking 
adults' success suggests the pitch-to-thickness association can be learned by 
experience. But the fact that German children were at chance indicates that this 
learning takes time. Intriguingly, Farsi and Turkish children's performance 
suggests that learning cross-modal associations can be boosted through 
experience with consistent metaphorical mappings in the input language.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12157
PMID: 24636133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


857. Dev Sci. 2014 Sep;17(5):743-56. doi: 10.1111/desc.12162. Epub 2014 Mar 13.

Two rooms, two representations? Episodic-like memory in toddlers and 
preschoolers.

Newcombe NS(1), Balcomb F, Ferrara K, Hansen M, Koski J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Temple University, USA.

Episodic memory involves binding together what-where-when associations. In three 
experiments, we tested the development of memory for such contextual 
associations in a naturalistic setting. Children searched for toys in two rooms 
with two different experimenters; each room contained two identical sets of four 
containers, but arranged differently. A distinct toy was hidden in a distinct 
container in each room. In Experiment 1, which involved children between 15 and 
26 months who were prompted with a very explicit cue (a part of the hidden toy), 
we found a marked shift in performance with age: while 15- to 20-month-olds 
concentrated their searches on the two containers that sometimes contained toys, 
they did not distinguish between them according to context, but 21-26-month-olds 
did. However, surprisingly, without toy cues, even the youngest children showed 
a fragile ability to disambiguate the two containers by room context. In 
Experiment 2, we tested 34- to 40-month-olds and 64- to 72-month-olds without 
toy cues. The 5-year-olds were nearly perfect, and the 3-year-olds showed a 
significant preference for the correct container given only the context. In 
Experiment 3, we filled in the age range, and also investigated the effects of 
the use of labels (i.e. names of experimenters and rooms) and of familiarization 
time, in groups of 34- to 40-month-olds, 42- to 48-month-olds, and 50- to 
56-month-olds. Neither labels nor familiarization time had an effect. Across 
experiments, there was regular age-related improvement in context-based memory. 
Overall, the results suggest that children's episodic memory may undergo an 
early qualitative change, yet to be precisely characterized, and that continuing 
increments in the use of contextual cues occur throughout the preschool period. 
A video abstract of this article can be viewed at 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DkwEFw0UEz4&list=PLwxXcOKHPC0llAPVcJyW4EtzlA934A2Rz&index=1.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12162
PMID: 24628962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


858. Dev Sci. 2014 Jul;17(4):628-35. doi: 10.1111/desc.12160. Epub 2014 Mar 13.

Neural correlates of infant accent discrimination: an fNIRS study.

Cristia A(1), Minagawa-Kawai Y, Egorova N, Gervain J, Filippin L, Cabrol D, 
Dupoux E.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et Psycholinguistique, Centre National de 
la Recherche Scientifique, Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales - Ecole 
Normale Supérieure, Paris, France; Neurobiology of Language, Max Planck 
Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

The present study investigated the neural correlates of infant discrimination of 
very similar linguistic varieties (Quebecois and Parisian French) using 
functional Near InfraRed Spectroscopy. In line with previous behavioral and 
electrophysiological data, there was no evidence that 3-month-olds discriminated 
the two regional accents, whereas 5-month-olds did, with the locus of 
discrimination in left anterior perisylvian regions. These neuroimaging results 
suggest that a developing language network relying crucially on left perisylvian 
cortices sustains infants' discrimination of similar linguistic varieties within 
this early period of infancy.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12160
PMID: 24628942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


859. Dev Sci. 2014 May;17(3):471-80. doi: 10.1111/desc.12133. Epub 2014 Feb 25.

Precursors to aggression are evident by 6 months of age.

Hay DF(1), Waters CS, Perra O, Swift N, Kairis V, Phillips R, Jones R, Goodyer 
I, Harold G, Thapar A, van Goozen S.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Cardiff University, UK.

We tested the hypothesis that developmental precursors to aggression are 
apparent in infancy. Up to three informants rated 301 firstborn infants for 
early signs of anger, hitting and biting; 279 (93%) were assessed again as 
toddlers. Informants' ratings were validated by direct observation at both ages. 
The precursor behaviours were significantly associated with known risk factors 
for high levels of aggressiveness. Individual differences were stable from early 
infancy to the third year and predicted broader conduct problems. These findings 
suggest that some individuals set forth on the trajectory to high levels of 
aggression by 6 months of age. The findings have implications for developmental 
studies of aggression, clinical prevention and intervention strategies, and 
theoretical considerations regarding the detection of precursors in different 
domains of development.

© 2014 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12133
PMID: 24612281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


860. Dev Sci. 2014 May;17(3):376-87. doi: 10.1111/desc.12127. Epub 2014 Feb 25.

When vision is not an option: children's integration of auditory and haptic 
information is suboptimal.

Petrini K(1), Remark A, Smith L, Nardini M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, UK.

When visual information is available, human adults, but not children, have been 
shown to reduce sensory uncertainty by taking a weighted average of sensory 
cues. In the absence of reliable visual information (e.g. extremely dark 
environment, visual disorders), the use of other information is vital. Here we 
ask how humans combine haptic and auditory information from childhood. In the 
first experiment, adults and children aged 5 to 11 years judged the relative 
sizes of two objects in auditory, haptic, and non-conflicting bimodal 
conditions. In , different groups of adults and children were tested in 
non-conflicting and conflicting bimodal conditions. In , adults reduced sensory 
uncertainty by integrating the cues optimally, while children did not. In , 
adults and children used similar weighting strategies to solve audio-haptic 
conflict. These results suggest that, in the absence of visual information, 
optimal integration of cues for discrimination of object size develops late in 
childhood.

© 2014 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12127
PMCID: PMC4240463
PMID: 24612244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


861. Dev Sci. 2014 Sep;17(5):697-713. doi: 10.1111/desc.12150. Epub 2014 Feb 27.

Parameter-based assessment of disturbed and intact components of visual 
attention in children with developmental dyslexia.

Bogon J(1), Finke K, Schulte-Körne G, Müller HJ, Schneider WX, Stenneken P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Regensburg, Germany; 
Clinical Linguistics, Bielefeld University, Germany; Center of Excellence 
'Cognitive Interaction Technology' (CITEC), Bielefeld University, Germany.

People with developmental dyslexia (DD) have been shown to be impaired in tasks 
that require the processing of multiple visual elements in parallel. It has been 
suggested that this deficit originates from disturbed visual attentional 
functions. The parameter-based assessment of visual attention based on 
Bundesen's () theory of visual attention allows one to identify and quantify the 
underlying deficits. The present study provides the first groupwise comparison 
between children with DD (n = 12; mean age 9.84 years) and typically developing 
children (n = 12; mean age 9.87 years) with regard to intact and disturbed 
components of visual attention. From the performance on whole- and 
partial-report tasks, we derived individual parameter estimates of four 
different parameters: visual processing speed, storage capacity of visual 
short-term memory (VSTM), laterality of attentional weighting and efficiency of 
top-down control. Groupwise comparisons revealed that general attentional 
resources, processing speed and VSTM storage capacity, are impaired in children 
with DD compared to typically developing children. In contrast, selectivity 
parameters, laterality of attentional selection and attentional top-down control 
did not differ between these groups. Relating the current findings to previous 
results, obtained in highly comparable methodological settings, from single 
cases of children with DD, and from a group of adults with DD, we conclude that 
slowed perceptual processing speed is a primary visual attentional deficit in 
DD. Furthermore, reduced VSTM storage capacity seems to modulate the 
difficulties in written language processing imposed by the disorder.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12150
PMID: 24576161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


862. Dev Sci. 2014 May;17(3):443-51. doi: 10.1111/desc.12134. Epub 2014 Jan 20.

In the absence of conflicting testimony young children trust inaccurate 
informants.

Vanderbilt KE(1), Heyman GD, Liu D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego, USA.

The present research investigated the nature of the inferences and decisions 
young children make about informants with a prior history of inaccuracies. 
Across three experiments, 3- and 4-year-olds (total N = 182) reacted to 
previously inaccurate informants who offered testimony in an object-labeling 
task. Of central interest was children's willingness to accept information 
provided by an inaccurate informant in different contexts of being alone, paired 
with an accurate informant, or paired with a novel (neutral) informant. 
Experiments 1 and 2 showed that when a previously inaccurate informant was alone 
and provided testimony that was not in conflict with the testimony of another 
informant, children systematically accepted the testimony of that informant. 
Experiment 3 showed that children accepted testimony from a neutral informant 
over an inaccurate informant when both provided information, but accepted 
testimony from an inaccurate informant rather than seeking information from an 
available neutral informant who did not automatically offer information. These 
results suggest that even though young children use prior history of accuracy to 
determine the relative reliability of informants, they are quite willing to 
trust the testimony of a single informant alone, regardless of whether that 
informant had previously been reliable.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12134
PMID: 24444426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


863. Dev Sci. 2014 Sep;17(5):682-96. doi: 10.1111/desc.12145. Epub 2014 Jan 11.

Emotional engagements predict and enhance social cognition in young chimpanzees.

Bard KA(1), Bakeman R, Boysen ST, Leavens DA.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Comparative and Evolutionary Psychology, University of Portsmouth, 
UK.

Social cognition in infancy is evident in coordinated triadic engagements, that 
is, infants attending jointly with social partners and objects. Current 
evolutionary theories of primate social cognition tend to highlight species 
differences in cognition based on human-unique cooperative motives. We consider 
a developmental model in which engagement experiences produce differential 
outcomes. We conducted a 10-year-long study in which two groups of 
laboratory-raised chimpanzee infants were given quantifiably different 
engagement experiences. Joint attention, cooperativeness, affect, and different 
levels of cognition were measured in 5- to 12-month-old chimpanzees, and 
compared to outcomes derived from a normative human database. We found that 
joint attention skills significantly improved across development for all 
infants, but by 12 months, the humans significantly surpassed the chimpanzees. 
We found that cooperativeness was stable in the humans, but by 12 months, the 
chimpanzee group given enriched engagement experiences significantly surpassed 
the humans. Past engagement experiences and concurrent affect were significant 
unique predictors of both joint attention and cooperativeness in 5- to 
12-month-old chimpanzees. When engagement experiences and concurrent affect were 
statistically controlled, joint attention and cooperation were not associated. 
We explain differential social cognition outcomes in terms of the significant 
influences of previous engagement experiences and affect, in addition to 
cognition. Our study highlights developmental processes that underpin the 
emergence of social cognition in support of evolutionary continuity.

© 2014 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12145
PMCID: PMC4116479
PMID: 24410843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


864. Dev Sci. 2014 Jul;17(4):584-95. doi: 10.1111/desc.12131. Epub 2014 Jan 11.

Moderator effects of working memory on the stability of ADHD symptoms by 
dopamine receptor gene polymorphisms during development.

Trampush JW(1), Jacobs MM, Hurd YL, Newcorn JH, Halperin JM.

Author information:
(1)Neuropsychology Doctoral Program, Graduate Center of the City University of 
New York, USA; Department of Psychology, Queens College of the City University 
of New York, USA.

We tested the hypothesis that dopamine D1 and D2 receptor gene (DRD1 and DRD2, 
respectively) polymorphisms and the development of working memory skills can 
interact to influence symptom change over 10 years in children with 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Specifically, we examined 
whether improvements in working memory maintenance and manipulation from 
childhood to early adulthood predicted the reduction of ADHD symptoms as a 
function of allelic variation in DRD1 and DRD2. Participants were 76 
7-11-year-old children with ADHD who were genotyped and prospectively followed 
for almost 10 years. ADHD symptoms were rated using the Attention Problems scale 
on the Child Behavior Checklist, and verbal working memory maintenance and 
manipulation, measured by Digit Span forward and backward, respectively, were 
assessed at baseline and follow-up. After correction for multiple testing, 
improvements in working memory manipulation, not maintenance, predicted 
reduction of symptomatology over development and was moderated by major allele 
homozygosity in two DRD1 polymorphisms (rs4532 and rs265978) previously linked 
with variation in D1 receptor expression. Depending on genetic background, 
developmental factors including age-dependent variation in DRD1 penetrance may 
facilitate the link between improvements in higher-order working memory and the 
remission of symptoms in individuals with childhood-diagnosed ADHD. Furthermore, 
the current findings suggest that DRD1 might contribute minimally to the 
emergence of symptoms and cognitive difficulties associated with ADHD in 
childhood, but may act as a modifier gene of these clinical features and outcome 
during later development for those with ADHD.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12131
PMCID: PMC4069210
PMID: 24410775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures The authors declare no competing 
interests.


865. Dev Sci. 2014 May;17(3):396-411. doi: 10.1111/desc.12128. Epub 2014 Jan 11.

Contributions of COMT Val¹⁵⁸ Met to cognitive stability and flexibility in 
infancy.

Markant J(1), Cicchetti D, Hetzel S, Thomas KM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, and Psychological Sciences, Brown 
University, USA.

Adaptive behavior requires focusing on relevant tasks while remaining sensitive 
to novel information. In adult studies of cognitive control, cognitive stability 
involves maintaining robust cognitive representations while cognitive 
flexibility involves updating of representations in response to novel 
information. Previous adult research has shown that the Met allele of the COMT 
Val(158) Met gene is associated with enhanced cognitive stability whereas the 
Val allele is associated with enhanced cognitive flexibility. Here we propose 
that the stability/flexibility framework can also be applied to infant research, 
with stability mapping onto early indices of behavioral regulation and 
flexibility mapping onto indices of behavioral reactivity. From this 
perspective, the present study examined whether COMT genotype was related to 
7-month-old infants' reactivity to novel stimuli and behavioral regulation. 
Cognitive stability and flexibility were assessed using (1) a motor approach 
task, (2) a habituation task, and (3) a parental-report measure of temperament. 
Val carriers were faster to reach for novel toys during the motor approach task 
and received higher scores on the temperament measure of approach to novelty. 
Met carriers showed enhanced dishabituation to the novel stimulus during the 
habituation task and received higher scores on the temperament measures of 
sustained attention and behavioral regulation. Overall, these results are 
consistent with adult research suggesting that the Met and Val alleles are 
associated with increased cognitive stability and flexibility, respectively, and 
thus suggest that COMT genotype may similarly affect cognitive function in 
infancy.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12128
PMCID: PMC4034686
PMID: 24410746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


866. Dev Sci. 2014 May;17(3):366-75. doi: 10.1111/desc.12126. Epub 2014 Jan 11.

Young-age gender differences in mathematics mediated by independent control or 
uncontrollability.

Zirk-Sadowski J(1), Lamptey C, Devine A, Haggard M, Szűcs D.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Neuroscience in Education, Department of Psychology, School of 
Biological Sciences, University of Cambridge, UK.

We studied whether the origins of math anxiety can be related to a biologically 
supported framework of stress induction: (un)controllability perception, here 
indicated by self-reported independent efforts in mathematics. Math anxiety was 
tested in 182 children (8- to 11-year-olds). Latent factor modeling was used to 
test hypotheses on plausible causal processes and mediations within competing 
models in quasi-experimental contrasts. Uncontrollability perception in 
mathematics, or (in)dependence of efforts, best fit the data as an antecedent of 
math anxiety. In addition, the relationship of math anxiety with gender was 
fully mediated by adaptive perception of control (i.e. controllability). That 
is, young boys differ from girls in terms of their experience of control in 
mathematics learning. These differences influence math anxiety. Our findings are 
consistent with recent suggestions in clinical literature according to which 
uncontrollability makes women more susceptible to fear and anxiety disorders.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12126
PMID: 24410725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


867. Dev Sci. 2014 Mar;17(2):270-81. doi: 10.1111/desc.12122. Epub 2014 Jan 4.

Watch the hands: infants can learn to follow gaze by seeing adults manipulate 
objects.

Deák GO(1), Krasno AM, Triesch J, Lewis J, Sepeta L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Science, University of California at San Diego, USA.

Infants gradually learn to share attention, but it is unknown how they acquire 
skills such as gaze-following. Deák and Triesch (2006) suggest that 
gaze-following could be acquired if infants learn that adults' gaze direction is 
likely to be aligned with interesting sights. This hypothesis stipulates that 
adults tend to look at things that infants find interesting, and that infants 
could learn by noticing this tendency. We tested the plausibility of this 
hypothesis through video-based micro-behavioral analysis of naturalistic 
parent-infant play. The results revealed that 3- to 11-month-old infants 
strongly preferred watching caregivers handle objects. In addition, when 
caregivers looked away from their infant they tended to look at their own 
object-handling. Finally, when infants looked toward the caregiver while she was 
looking at her own hands, the infant's next eye movement was often toward the 
caregiver's object-handling. In this way infants receive adequate naturalistic 
input to learn associations between their parent's gaze direction and the 
locations of interesting sights.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12122
PMID: 24387193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


868. Dev Sci. 2014 Mar;17(2):203-11. doi: 10.1111/desc.12113. Epub 2013 Dec 14.

Costs and benefits linked to developments in cognitive control.

Blackwell KA(1), Munakata Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Salem College, USA.

Developing cognitive control over one's thoughts, emotions, and actions is a 
fundamental process that predicts important life outcomes. Such control begins 
in infancy, and shifts during development from a predominantly reactive form 
(e.g. retrieving task-relevant information when needed) to an increasingly 
proactive form (e.g. maintaining task-relevant information in anticipation of 
needing it). While such developments are generally viewed as adaptive, cognitive 
abilities can also involve trade-offs, such that the benefits of developing 
increasingly proactive control may come with associated costs. In two 
experiments, we test for such cognitive trade-offs in children who are 
transitioning to proactive control. We find that proactive control predicts 
expected benefits in children's working memory, but is also associated with 
predicted costs in disproportionately slowing children under conditions of 
distraction. These findings highlight unique advantages and disadvantages of 
proactive and reactive control, and suggest caution in attempting to alter their 
balance during development.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12113
PMCID: PMC4078978
PMID: 24329774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


869. Dev Sci. 2014 Mar;17(2):187-202. doi: 10.1111/desc.12114. Epub 2013 Nov 23.

Neural connectivity patterns underlying symbolic number processing indicate 
mathematical achievement in children.

Park J(1), Li R, Brannon EM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, USA.

In early childhood, humans learn culturally specific symbols for number that 
allow them entry into the world of complex numerical thinking. Yet little is 
known about how the brain supports the development of the uniquely human 
symbolic number system. Here, we use functional magnetic resonance imaging along 
with an effective connectivity analysis to investigate the neural substrates for 
symbolic number processing in young children. We hypothesized that, as children 
solidify the mapping between symbols and underlying magnitudes, important 
developmental changes occur in the neural communication between the right 
parietal region, important for the representation of non-symbolic numerical 
magnitudes, and other brain regions known to be critical for processing 
numerical symbols. To test this hypothesis, we scanned children between 4 and 
6 years of age while they performed a magnitude comparison task with Arabic 
numerals (numerical, symbolic), dot arrays (numerical, non-symbolic), and lines 
(non-numerical). We then identified the right parietal seed region that showed 
greater blood-oxygen-level-dependent signal in the numerical versus the 
non-numerical conditions. A psychophysiological interaction method was used to 
find patterns of effective connectivity arising from this parietal seed region 
specific to symbolic compared to non-symbolic number processing. Two brain 
regions, the left supramarginal gyrus and the right precentral gyrus, showed 
significant effective connectivity from the right parietal cortex. Moreover, the 
degree of this effective connectivity to the left supramarginal gyrus was 
correlated with age, and the degree of the connectivity to the right precentral 
gyrus predicted performance on a standardized symbolic math test. These findings 
suggest that effective connectivity underlying symbolic number processing may be 
critical as children master the associations between numerical symbols and 
magnitudes, and that these connectivity patterns may serve as an important 
indicator of mathematical achievement.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12114
PMID: 24267664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


870. Dev Sci. 2014 Mar;17(2):175-86. doi: 10.1111/desc.12107. Epub 2013 Nov 22.

Cortical response variability as a developmental index of selective auditory 
attention.

Strait DL(1), Slater J, Abecassis V, Kraus N.

Author information:
(1)Auditory Neuroscience Laboratory, Northwestern University, USA; Institute for 
Neuroscience, Northwestern University, USA.

Attention induces synchronicity in neuronal firing for the encoding of a given 
stimulus at the exclusion of others. Recently, we reported decreased variability 
in scalp-recorded cortical evoked potentials to attended compared with ignored 
speech in adults. Here we aimed to determine the developmental time course for 
this neural index of auditory attention. We compared cortical auditory-evoked 
variability with attention across three age groups: preschoolers, school-aged 
children and young adults. Results reveal an increased impact of selective 
auditory attention on cortical response variability with development. Although 
all three age groups have equivalent response variability to attended speech, 
only school-aged children and adults have a distinction between attend and 
ignore conditions. Preschoolers, on the other hand, demonstrate no impact of 
attention on cortical responses, which we argue reflects the gradual emergence 
of attention within this age range. Outcomes are interpreted in the context of 
the behavioral relevance of cortical response variability and its potential to 
serve as a developmental index of cognitive skill.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12107
PMCID: PMC4119172
PMID: 24267508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


871. Dev Sci. 2014 Jan;17(1):110-24. doi: 10.1111/desc.12098. Epub 2013 Oct 31.

Audio-visual speech perception: a developmental ERP investigation.

Knowland VC(1), Mercure E, Karmiloff-Smith A, Dick F, Thomas MS.

Author information:
(1)School of Health Sciences, City University, London, UK; Department of 
Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck College, London, UK.

Being able to see a talking face confers a considerable advantage for speech 
perception in adulthood. However, behavioural data currently suggest that 
children fail to make full use of these available visual speech cues until age 8 
or 9. This is particularly surprising given the potential utility of multiple 
informational cues during language learning. We therefore explored this at the 
neural level. The event-related potential (ERP) technique has been used to 
assess the mechanisms of audio-visual speech perception in adults, with visual 
cues reliably modulating auditory ERP responses to speech. Previous work has 
shown congruence-dependent shortening of auditory N1/P2 latency and 
congruence-independent attenuation of amplitude in the presence of auditory and 
visual speech signals, compared to auditory alone. The aim of this study was to 
chart the development of these well-established modulatory effects over 
mid-to-late childhood. Experiment 1 employed an adult sample to validate a 
child-friendly stimulus set and paradigm by replicating previously observed 
effects of N1/P2 amplitude and latency modulation by visual speech cues; it also 
revealed greater attenuation of component amplitude given incongruent 
audio-visual stimuli, pointing to a new interpretation of the amplitude 
modulation effect. Experiment 2 used the same paradigm to map cross-sectional 
developmental change in these ERP responses between 6 and 11 years of age. The 
effect of amplitude modulation by visual cues emerged over development, while 
the effect of latency modulation was stable over the child sample. These data 
suggest that auditory ERP modulation by visual speech represents separable 
underlying cognitive processes, some of which show earlier maturation than 
others over the course of development.

© 2013 The Authors Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12098
PMCID: PMC3995015
PMID: 24176002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


872. Dev Sci. 2014 Jan;17(1):47-58. doi: 10.1111/desc.12089. Epub 2013 Oct 7.

Domain-specific development of face memory but not face perception.

Weigelt S(1), Koldewyn K, Dilks DD, Balas B, McKone E, Kanwisher N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Science, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, USA; Department of Psychology, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany.

How does the remarkable human ability for face recognition arise over 
development? Competing theories have proposed either late maturity (beyond 
10 years) or early maturity (before 5 years), but have not distinguished between 
perceptual and memory aspects of face recognition. Here, we demonstrate a 
perception-memory dissociation. We compare rate of development for (adult, 
human) faces versus other social stimuli (bodies), other discrete objects 
(cars), and other categories processed in discrete brain regions (scenes, 
bodies), from 5 years to adulthood. For perceptual discrimination, performance 
improved with age at the same rate for faces and all other categories, 
indicating no domain-specific development. In contrast, face memory increased 
more strongly than non-face memory, indicating domain-specific development. The 
results imply that each theory is partly true: the late maturity theory holds 
for face memory, and the early maturity theory for face perception.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12089
PMID: 24118764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


873. Dev Sci. 2013 Nov;16(6):941-51. doi: 10.1111/desc.12088. Epub 2013 Aug 24.

White matter maturation supports the development of reasoning ability through 
its influence on processing speed.

Ferrer E(1), Whitaker KJ, Steele JS, Green CT, Wendelken C, Bunge SA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California at Davis, USA.

The structure of the human brain changes in several ways throughout childhood 
and adolescence. Perhaps the most salient of these changes is the strengthening 
of white matter tracts that enable distal brain regions to communicate with one 
another more quickly and efficiently. Here, we sought to understand whether and 
how white matter changes contribute to improved reasoning ability over 
development. In particular, we sought to understand whether previously reported 
relationships between white matter microstructure and reasoning are mediated by 
processing speed. To this end, we analyzed diffusion tensor imaging data as well 
as data from standard psychometric tests of cognitive abilities from 103 
individuals between the ages of 6 and 18. We used structural equation modeling 
to investigate the network of relationships between brain and behavior 
variables. Our analyses provide support for the hypothesis that white matter 
maturation (as indexed either by microstructural organization or volume) 
supports improved processing speed, which, in turn, supports improved reasoning 
ability.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12088
PMCID: PMC3801426
PMID: 24118718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


874. Dev Sci. 2013 Nov;16(6):841-9. doi: 10.1111/desc.12074. Epub 2013 Jul 2.

Infants use social context to bind actions into a collaborative sequence.

Fawcett C(1), Gredebäck G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Eye tracking was used to show that 18-month-old infants are sensitive to social 
context as a sign that others' actions are bound together as a collaborative 
sequence based on a joint goal. Infants observed five identical demonstrations 
in which Actor 1 moved a block to one location and Actor 2 moved the same block 
to a new location, creating a sequence of actions that could be considered 
either individual actions or collaboration. In the test phase, Actor 1 was alone 
and sitting so that she could reach both locations. The question was whether she 
would place a new block in the location she had previously (individual goal) or 
in the location that could be considered the goal of collaboration (joint goal). 
Importantly, in the Social condition, the actors were socially engaged with each 
other before and during the demonstration, while in the Non-Social condition, 
they were not. Results revealed that infants in the Social condition 
spontaneously anticipated Actor 1 placing her block in the joint goal location 
more often than those in the Non-Social condition. Thus, the social context 
seems to allow infants to bind actions into a collaborative sequence and 
anticipate joint rather than individual goals, giving insight into how actions 
are perceived using top-down processing early in life.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12074
PMID: 24118711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


875. Dev Sci. 2013 Nov;16(6):815-27. doi: 10.1111/desc.12069. Epub 2013 Aug 7.

Fine motor skill predicts expressive language in infant siblings of children 
with autism.

LeBarton ES(1), Iverson JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, USA.

We investigated whether fine motor and expressive language skills are related in 
the later-born siblings of children with autism (heightened-risk, HR infants) 
who are at increased risk for language delays. We observed 34 HR infants 
longitudinally from 12 to 36 months. We used parent report and standardized 
observation measures to assess fine motor skill from 12 to 24 months in HR 
infants (Study 1) and its relation to later expressive vocabulary at 36 months 
in HR infants (Study 2). In Study 1, we also included 25 infants without a 
family history of autism to serve as a normative comparison group for a 
parent-report fine motor measure. We found that HR infants exhibited fine motor 
delays between 12 and 24 months and expressive vocabulary delays at 36 months. 
Further, fine motor skill significantly predicted expressive language at 36 
months. Fine motor and expressive language skills are related early in 
development in HR infants, who, as a group, exhibit risk for delays in both. Our 
findings highlight the importance of considering fine motor skill in children at 
risk for language impairments and may have implications for early identification 
of expressive language difficulties.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12069
PMCID: PMC3808875
PMID: 24118709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


876. Dev Sci. 2013 Nov;16(6):801-14. doi: 10.1111/desc.12085. Epub 2013 Sep 5.

From outcome prediction to action selection: developmental change in the role of 
action-effect bindings.

Verschoor SA(1), Spapé M, Biro S, Hommel B.

Author information:
(1)Leiden University Institute for Psychological Research & Leiden Institute for 
Brain and Cognition, The Netherlands.

Ideomotor theory considers bidirectional action-effect associations to be the 
fundamental building blocks for intentional action. The present study employed a 
novel pupillometric and oculomotor paradigm to study developmental changes in 
the role of action-effects in the acquisition of voluntary action. Our findings 
suggest that both 7- and 12-month-olds (and adults) can use acquired 
action-effect bindings to predict action outcomes but only 12-month-olds (and 
adults) showed evidence for employing action-effects to select actions. This 
dissociation supports the idea that infants acquire action-effect knowledge 
before they have developed the cognitive machinery necessary to make use of that 
knowledge to perform intentional actions.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12085
PMID: 24118708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


877. Dev Sci. 2013 Nov;16(6):793-800. doi: 10.1111/desc.12066. Epub 2013 Jun 8.

The early development of human mirror mechanisms: evidence from 
electromyographic recordings at 3 and 6 months.

Turati C(1), Natale E, Bolognini N, Senna I, Picozzi M, Longhi E, Cassia VM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca, Italy.

In primates and adult humans direct understanding of others' action is provided 
by mirror mechanisms matching action observation and action execution (e.g. 
Casile, Caggiano & Ferrari, 2011). Despite the growing body of evidence 
detailing the existence of these mechanisms in the adult human brain, their 
origins and early development are largely unknown. In this study, for the first 
time, electromyographic (EMG) measures were used to shed light on the emergence 
of mirror motor mechanisms in infancy. EMG activity was recorded while 6- and 
3-month-old infants watched two videos displaying an agent reaching for, 
grasping and bringing an object either to the mouth or to the head. Results 
indicate that the motor system of 6-month-olds, but not 3-month-olds, was 
recruited and selectively modulated during observation of the goal-directed 
actions, favoring the idea that mirror mechanisms driving action understanding 
gradually emerge during early development.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12066
PMID: 24118707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


878. Dev Sci. 2014 Jan;17(1):23-34. doi: 10.1111/desc.12095. Epub 2013 Oct 1.

Infants' goal anticipation during failed and successful reaching actions.

Brandone AC(1), Horwitz SR, Aslin RN, Wellman HM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Lehigh University, USA.

The ability to interpret and predict the actions of others is crucial to social 
interaction and to social, cognitive, and linguistic development. The current 
study provided a strong test of this predictive ability by assessing (1) whether 
infants are capable of prospectively processing actions that fail to achieve 
their intended outcome, and (2) how infants respond to events in which their 
initial predictions are not confirmed. Using eye tracking, 8-month-olds, 
10-month-olds, and adults watched an actor repeatedly reach over a barrier to 
either successfully or unsuccessfully retrieve a ball. Ten-month-olds and adults 
produced anticipatory looks to the ball, even when the action was unsuccessful 
and the actor never achieved his goal. Moreover, they revised their initial 
predictions in response to accumulating evidence of the actor's failure. 
Eight-month-olds showed anticipatory looking only after seeing the actor 
successfully grasp and retrieve the ball. Results support a flexible, 
prospective social information processing ability that emerges during the first 
year of life.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12095
PMCID: PMC3867601
PMID: 24112439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


879. Dev Sci. 2013 Sep;16(5):713-27. doi: 10.1111/desc.12047. Epub 2013 Jun 11.

Blocking a redundant cue: what does it say about preschoolers' causal 
competence?

Kloos H(1), Sloutsky VM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati, USA.

The current study investigates the degree to which preschoolers can engage in 
causal inferences in a blocking paradigm, a paradigm in which a cue is 
consistently linked with a target, either alone (A-T) or paired with another cue 
(AB-T). Unlike previous blocking studies with preschoolers, we manipulated the 
causal structure of the events without changing the specific contingencies. In 
particular, cues were said to be either potential causes (prediction condition), 
or they were said to be potential effects (diagnosis condition). The causally 
appropriate inference is to block the redundant cue B when it is a potential 
cause of the target, but not when it is a potential effect. Findings show a 
stark difference in performance between preschoolers and adults: While adults 
blocked the redundant cue only in the prediction condition, children blocked the 
redundant cue indiscriminately across both conditions. Therefore, children, but 
not adults, ignored the causal structure of the events. These findings challenge 
a developmental account that attributes sophisticated machinery of causal 
reasoning to young children.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12047
PMCID: PMC3775013
PMID: 24033577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


880. Dev Sci. 2013 Sep;16(5):641-52. doi: 10.1111/desc.12096. Epub 2013 Jul 30.

Associations between children's socioeconomic status and prefrontal cortical 
thickness.

Lawson GM(1), Duda JT, Avants BB, Wu J, Farah MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, USA.

Childhood socioeconomic status (SES) predicts executive function performance and 
measures of prefrontal cortical function, but little is known about its 
anatomical correlates. Structural MRI and demographic data from a sample of 283 
healthy children from the NIH MRI Study of Normal Brain Development were used to 
investigate the relationship between SES and prefrontal cortical thickness. 
Specifically, we assessed the association between two principal measures of 
childhood SES, family income and parental education, and gray matter thickness 
in specific subregions of prefrontal cortex and on the asymmetry of these areas. 
After correcting for multiple comparisons and controlling for potentially 
confounding variables, parental education significantly predicted cortical 
thickness in the right anterior cingulate gyrus and left superior frontal gyrus. 
These results suggest that brain structure in frontal regions may provide a 
meaningful link between SES and cognitive function among healthy, typically 
developing children.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12096
PMCID: PMC3775298
PMID: 24033570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


881. Dev Sci. 2013 Jul;16(4):574-83. doi: 10.1111/desc.12054. Epub 2013 May 28.

Plasticity during childhood and adolescence: innovative approaches to 
investigating neurocognitive development.

Cohen Kadosh K(1), Linden DE, Lau JY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3UD, 
UK. kathrin.cohenkadosh@psy.ox.ac.uk

Adolescence is a period of profound change, which holds substantial 
developmental milestones, but also unique challenges to the individual. In this 
opinion paper, we highlight the potential of combining two recently developed 
behavioural and neural training techniques (cognitive bias modification and 
functional magnetic neuroimaging-based neurofeedback) into a research approach 
that could help make the most of increased levels of plasticity during childhood 
and adolescence. We discuss how this powerful combination could be used to 
explore changing brain-behaviour relationships throughout development in the 
context of emotion processing, a cognitive domain that exhibits continuous 
development throughout the second decade of life. By targeting both behaviour 
and brain response, we would also be in an excellent position to define sensible 
time windows for enhancing plasticity, thereby allowing for targeted 
intervention approaches that can help improve emotion processing in both 
typically and atypically developing populations.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12054
PMID: 23786475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


882. Dev Sci. 2013 Jul;16(4):554-63. doi: 10.1111/desc.12049. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Infant ERPs separate children at risk of dyslexia who become good readers from 
those who become poor readers.

van Zuijen TL(1), Plakas A, Maassen BA, Maurits NM, van der Leij A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Development and Education, Faculty of Social and 
Behavioral Sciences, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
T.L.vanzuijen@uva.nl

Dyslexia is heritable and associated with phonological processing deficits that 
can be reflected in the event-related potentials (ERPs). Here, we recorded ERPs 
from 2-month-old infants at risk of dyslexia and from a control group to 
investigate whether their auditory system processes /bAk/ and /dAk/ changes 
differently. The speech sounds were presented in an oddball paradigm. The 
children were followed longitudinally and performed a word reading fluency test 
in second grade. The infant ERPs were subsequently analyzed according to high or 
low reading fluency in order to find a neurophysiological precursor of poor 
reading fluency. The results show that the fluent reading children (from both 
the at-risk and the control group) processed the speech sound changes 
differentially in infancy as indicated by a mismatch response (MMR). In the 
control group the MMR was frontally positive and in the fluent at-risk group the 
MMR was parietally positive. The non-fluent at-risk group did not show an MMR. 
We conclude that at-risk children who became fluent readers were better at 
speech processing in infancy than those who became non-fluent readers. This 
indicates a very early speech processing deficit in the group of later 
non-fluent readers.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12049
PMID: 23786473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


883. Dev Sci. 2013 Jul;16(4):485-98. doi: 10.1111/desc.12041. Epub 2013 Jun 1.

The sustained effect of emotional signals on neural processing in 12-month-olds.

Leventon JS(1), Bauer PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, 36 Eagle Row, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 
30322, USA. jleven2@emory.edu

Around the end of the first year of life, infants develop a social referencing 
ability - using emotional information from others to guide their own behavior. 
Much research on social referencing has focused on changes in behavior in 
response to emotional information. The present study was an investigation of the 
changes in neural responses that underlie social referencing behavior, reflected 
in event-related potentials (ERPs). Twenty-six 12-month-olds participated in a 
single-session visit in which ERPs were recorded both immediately before and 
after a behavioral intervention in which infants' caregivers provided positive, 
negative or neutral information about each of three stimuli (ERP data available 
for n = 17). After the intervention, infants devoted more neural resources to 
processing negative versus neutral and positive information, as observed in 
early and late positive-going components. Changes in neural responses from the 
pre- to post-intervention recordings clarify this observation, indicating a 
sustained response in the negative and positive conditions, and a decrease in 
the neutral condition, suggesting an attenuation effect in the neutral 
condition. Further, infants who attended most to the objects in the behavioral 
intervention showed increased neural responses in the negative condition and 
decreased responses in the positive condition. Taken together, these findings 
suggest that infants' neural responses are differentially affected by positive, 
negative and neutral information. Furthermore, the findings highlight the 
importance of measuring the change in neural responses to better interpret 
post-experience responses.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12041
PMID: 23786468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


884. Dev Sci. 2013 May;16(3):463-75. doi: 10.1111/desc.12043. Epub 2013 Feb 23.

A comparison of rural and urban Indian children's visual detection of 
threatening and nonthreatening animals.

Penkunas MJ(1), Coss RG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Recent studies indicate that young children preferentially attend to snakes, 
spiders, and lions compared with nondangerous species, but these results have 
yet to be replicated in populations that actually experience dangerous animals 
in nature. This multi-site study investigated the visual-detection biases of 
southern Indian children towards two potentially dangerous taxa, snakes and 
lions, that constituted major threats during human evolution. Three- to 
8-year-old children from two distinct populations were presented with 
visual-search tasks containing one target image embedded in matrices of eight 
distractor images. Children living in Bangalore city, an urban setting in which 
exposure to dangerous animals would only occur occasionally during family 
outings to zoos and forest areas, were compared with children living in and 
around National Parks where exposure to dangerous species is frequent. In the 
first two experiments, children from both locations detected snake and lion 
images more rapidly than nonthreatening lizard and antelope images, 
respectively. Neither urban nor rural children displayed a bias for detecting 
horses versus cows, the latter constituting a familiar animal with strong 
religious significance. For all three experiments, the reaction times of urban 
and rural children were very similar, indicating that periodic exposure to 
dangerous animals early in life, coupled with adult cautioning, did not 
facilitate better snake and lion detection. This consistency of urban and rural 
children with different exposure to dangerous animals suggests that detection of 
some dangerous species may reflect both experience in nature and visual biases 
shaped by natural selection.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12043
PMID: 23587043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


885. Dev Sci. 2013 Mar;16(2):209-226. doi: 10.1111/desc.12017.

The mentalistic basis of core social cognition: experiments in preverbal infants 
and a computational model.

Kiley Hamlin J(1), Ullman T(2), Tenenbaum J(2), Goodman N(3), Baker C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Canada.
(2)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, USA.

Evaluating individuals based on their pro- and anti-social behaviors is 
fundamental to successful human interaction. Recent research suggests that even 
preverbal infants engage in social evaluation; however, it remains an open 
question whether infants' judgments are driven uniquely by an analysis of the 
mental states that motivate others' helpful and unhelpful actions, or whether 
non-mentalistic inferences are at play. Here we present evidence from 
10-month-olds, motivated and supported by a Bayesian computational model, for 
mentalistic social evaluation in the first year of life.A video abstract of this 
article can be viewed at http://youtu.be/rD_Ry5oqCYE.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12017
PMCID: PMC4100482
PMID: 23432831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


886. Dev Sci. 2013 Jan;16(1):101-10. doi: 10.1111/desc.12009.

Speech-evoked auditory brainstem responses reflect familial and cognitive 
influences.

Hornickel J(1), Lin D, Kraus N.

Author information:
(1)Auditory Neuroscience Lab, Department of Communication Sciences and 
Disorders, Northwestern University, USA. m.van.wermeskerken@vu.nl

Cortical function and related cognitive, language, and communication skills are 
genetically influenced. The auditory brainstem response to speech is linked to 
language skill, reading ability, cognitive skills, and speech-in-noise 
perception; however, the impact of shared genetic and environmental factors on 
the response has not been investigated. We assessed auditory brainstem responses 
to speech presented in quiet and background noise from (1) 23 pairs of same sex, 
same learning diagnosis siblings (Siblings), (2) 23 unrelated children matched 
on age, sex, IQ, and reading ability to one of the siblings (Reading-Matched), 
and (3) 22 pairs of unrelated children matched on age and sex but not on reading 
ability to the same sibling (Age/Sex-Matched). By quantifying response 
similarity as the intersubject response-to-response correlation for sibling 
pairs, reading-matched pairs, and age- and sex-matched pairs, we found that 
siblings had more similar responses than age- and sex-matched pairs and 
reading-matched pairs. Similarity of responses between siblings was as high as 
the similarity of responses collected from an individual over the course of the 
recording session. Responses from unrelated children matched on reading were 
more similar than responses from unrelated children matched only on age and sex, 
supporting previous data linking variations in auditory brainstem activity with 
variations in reading ability. These results suggest that auditory brainstem 
function can be influenced by siblingship and auditory-based communication 
skills such as reading, motivating the use of speech-evoked auditory brainstem 
responses for assessing risk of reading and communication impairments in family 
members.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12009
PMCID: PMC3539249
PMID: 23278931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


887. Dev Sci. 2013 Jan;16(1):91-100. doi: 10.1111/desc.12006. Epub 2012 Oct 27.

Getting the closer object? An information-based dissociation between vision for 
perception and vision for movement in early infancy.

van Wermeskerken M(1), van der Kamp J, Savelsbergh GJ, von Hofsten C.

Author information:
(1)Research Institute MOVE, Faculty of Human Movement Sciences, VU University, 
The Netherlands. m.van.wermeskerken@vu.nl

In human adults two functionally and neuro-anatomically separate systems exist 
for the use of visual information in perception and the use of visual 
information to control movements (Milner & Goodale, 1995, 2008). We investigated 
whether this separation is already functioning in the early stages of the 
development of reaching. To this end, 6- and 7-month-old infants were presented 
with two identical objects at identical distances in front of an illusory 
Ponzo-like background that made them appear to be located at different 
distances. In two further conditions without the illusory background, the two 
objects were presented at physically different distances. Preferential reaching 
outcomes indicated that the allocentric distance information contained in the 
illusory background affected the perception of object distance. Yet, infants' 
reaching kinematics were only affected by the objects' physical distance and not 
by the perceptual distance manipulation. These findings were taken as evidence 
for the two-visual systems, as proposed by Milner and Goodale (2008), being 
functional in early infancy. We discuss the wider implications of this early 
dissociation.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12006
PMID: 23278930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


888. Dev Sci. 2013 Jan;16(1):84-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01191.x. Epub 2012 
Oct 10.

Fearlessness in juvenile offenders is associated with offending rate.

Syngelaki EM(1), Fairchild G, Moore SC, Savage JC, van Goozen SH.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Cardiff University, UK.

Poor fear conditioning is a correlate of violent offending in adults, but there 
is no evidence concerning juvenile offenders. Our aim was to compare emotional 
learning in juvenile offenders and controls and establish whether crime rate is 
related to seriousness of emotional learning problems. To this end, emotional 
learning was assessed in 42 juvenile offenders by measuring skin conductance 
responding (SCR) during fear conditioning. Compared to controls, juvenile 
offenders showed lower conditioned SCRs to visual stimuli associated with a 
subsequent aversive stimulus and the magnitude of the SCR during fear 
acquisition was inversely associated with the number of their recorded offences. 
These findings suggest that juvenile offenders have impairments in the neural 
systems that subserve emotional learning. The implication is that using punitive 
measures to control persistent offenders is unlikely to be effective in an 
identifiable group of juvenile offenders.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01191.x
PMID: 23278929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


889. Dev Sci. 2013 Jan;16(1):35-46. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01190.x. Epub 2012 
Oct 18.

Do subitizing deficits in developmental dyscalculia involve pattern recognition 
weakness?

Ashkenazi S(1), Mark-Zigdon N, Henik A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience, Ben-Gurion 
University of the Negev, Israel. sarit.ashkenas@gmail.com

The abilities of children diagnosed with developmental dyscalculia (DD) were 
examined in two types of object enumeration: subitizing, and small estimation 
(5-9 dots). Subitizing is usually defined as a fast and accurate assessment of a 
number of small dots (range 1 to 4 dots), and estimation is an imprecise process 
to assess a large number of items (range 5 dots or more). Based on reaction time 
(RT) and accuracy analysis, our results indicated a deficit in the subitizing 
and small estimation range among DD participants in relation to controls. There 
are indications that subitizing is based on pattern recognition, thus presenting 
dots in a canonical shape in the estimation range should result in a 
subitizing-like pattern. In line with this theory, our control group presented a 
subitizing-like pattern in the small estimation range for canonically arranged 
dots, whereas the DD participants presented a deficit in the estimation of 
canonically arranged dots. The present finding indicates that pattern 
recognition difficulties may play a significant role in both subitizing and 
subitizing deficits among those with DD.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01190.x
PMID: 23278925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


890. Dev Sci. 2012 Nov;15(6):863-75. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01187.x.

Learning without representational change: development of numerical estimation in 
individuals with Williams syndrome.

Opfer JE(1), Martens MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. 
opfer.7@osu.edu

Experience engenders learning, but not all learning involves representational 
change. In this paper, we provide a dramatic case study of the distinction 
between learning and representational change. Specifically, we examined long- 
and short-term changes in representations of numeric magnitudes by asking 
individuals with Williams syndrome (WS) and typically developing (TD) children 
to estimate the position of numbers on a number line. As with TD children, 
accuracy of WS children's numerical estimates improved with age (Experiment 1) 
and feedback (Experiment 2). Both long- and short-term changes in estimates of 
WS individuals, however, followed an atypical developmental trajectory: as TD 
children gained in age and experience, increases in accuracy were accompanied by 
a logarithmic-to-linear shift in estimates of numerical magnitudes, whereas in 
WS individuals, accuracy increased but logarithmic estimation patterns persisted 
well into adulthood and after extensive training. These findings suggest that 
development of numerical estimation in WS is both arrested and atypical.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01187.x
PMID: 23106740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


891. Dev Sci. 2012 Nov;15(6):830-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01179.x. Epub 2012 
Sep 7.

Neural correlates of perceptual narrowing in cross-species face-voice matching.

Grossmann T(1), Missana M, Friederici AD, Ghazanfar AA.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, 
Germany. grossman@cbs.mpg.de

Integrating the multisensory features of talking faces is critical to learning 
and extracting coherent meaning from social signals. While we know much about 
the development of these capacities at the behavioral level, we know very little 
about the underlying neural processes. One prominent behavioral milestone of 
these capacities is the perceptual narrowing of face-voice matching, whereby 
young infants match faces and voices across species, but older infants do not. 
In the present study, we provide neurophysiological evidence for developmental 
decline in cross-species face-voice matching. We measured event-related brain 
potentials (ERPs) while 4- and 8-month-old infants watched and listened to 
congruent and incongruent audio-visual presentations of monkey vocalizations and 
humans mimicking monkey vocalizations. The ERP results indicated that younger 
infants distinguished between the congruent and the incongruent faces and voices 
regardless of species, whereas in older infants, the sensitivity to multisensory 
congruency was limited to the human face and voice. Furthermore, with 
development, visual and frontal brain processes and their functional 
connectivity became more sensitive to the congruence of human faces and voices 
relative to monkey faces and voices. Our data show the neural correlates of 
perceptual narrowing in face-voice matching and support the notion that 
postnatal experience with species identity is associated with neural changes in 
multisensory processing (Lewkowicz & Ghazanfar, 2009).

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01179.x
PMID: 23106737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


892. Dev Sci. 2012 Nov;15(6):791-800. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01178.x. Epub 
2012 Aug 29.

Temporal discounting of monetary rewards in children and adolescents with ADHD 
and autism spectrum disorders.

Demurie E(1), Roeyers H, Baeyens D, Sonuga-Barke E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Clinical and Health Psychology, Ghent University, 
Belgium. ellen.demurie@ugent.be

It has been difficult to differentiate attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in terms of some aspects of their 
cognitive profile. While both show deficits in executive functions, it has been 
suggested that they may differ in their response to monetary reward. For 
instance, children with ADHD prefer small immediate over large delayed rewards 
more than typically developing controls. One explanation for this is that they 
discount the value of rewards to a higher degree as they are moved into the 
future. The current study investigated whether children with ADHD can be 
differentiated from those with ASD in terms of reward discounting. Thirty-nine 
children (8-16 y) with ADHD, 34 children with ASD and 46 typically developing 
controls performed a hypothetical monetary temporal discounting task. 
Participants were instructed to make repeated choices between small variable 
rewards (0, 5, 10, 20, 30€) delivered immediately and large rewards delivered 
after a variable delay. Children with ADHD but not ASD discounted future rewards 
at a higher rate than typically developing controls. These data confirm steeper 
discounting of future rewards in ADHD and add to a small but growing literature 
showing that the psychological profile of ADHD can be distinguished from that of 
ASD in terms of disrupted motivational processes.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01178.x
PMID: 23106733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


893. Dev Sci. 2012 Nov;15(6):762-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01167.x.

Preschool children's interpretation of object-initial sentences: neural 
correlates of their behavioral performance.

Schipke CS(1), Knoll LJ, Friederici AD, Oberecker R.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Germany. 
schipke@cbs.mpg.de

The acquisition of the function of case-marking is a key step in the development 
of sentence processing for German-speaking children since case-marking reveals 
the relations between sentential arguments. In this study, we investigated the 
development of the processing of case-marking and argument structures in 
children at 3, 4;6 and 6 years of age, as well as its processing in adults. 
Using EEG, we measured event-related potentials (ERPs) in response to 
object-initial compared to subject-initial German sentences including transitive 
verbs and case-marked noun phrases referring to animate arguments. We also 
tested children's behavioral competence in a sentence-picture matching task. 
Word order and case-marking were manipulated in German main clauses. Adults' 
behavioral performance was close to perfect and their ERPs revealed a negativity 
for the processing of the topicalized accusative marked noun phrase (NP1) and no 
effect for the second NP (NP2) in the object-initial structure. Children's 
behavioral data showed a significant above-chance outcome in the subject-initial 
condition for all age groups, but not for the object-initial condition. In 
contrast to adults, the ERPs of 3-year-olds showed a positivity at NP1, 
indicating difficulties in processing the non-canonical object-initial 
structures. Children at the age of 4;6 did not differ in the processing patterns 
of object-initial vs. subject-initial sentences at NP1 but showed a slight 
positivity at NP2. This positivity at NP2, which implies syntactic integration 
difficulties, is more pronounced in 6-year-olds but is absent in adults. At NP1, 
however, 6-year-olds show the same negativity as adults. In sum, the behavioral 
and electrophysiological findings demonstrate that children in each age group 
use different strategies, which are indicative of their developmental stage. 
While 3-year-olds merely detect differences in the two sentence structures 
without being able to use this information for sentence comprehension, 
4;6-year-olds proceed to use mainly a word-order strategy, processing NP1 in 
both conditions in the same manner, which leads to processing difficulties upon 
detecting case-marking cues at NP2. At the age of 6, children are able to use 
case-marking cues for comprehension but still show enhanced effort for correct 
thematic-role assignment.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01167.x
PMID: 23106730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


894. Dev Sci. 2012 Nov;15(6):732-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01175.x. Epub 2012 
Aug 29.

Toddlers recognize words in an unfamiliar accent after brief exposure.

Schmale R(1), Cristia A, Seidl A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, North Park University, Chicago, IL 60625, USA. 
rschmale@northpark.edu

Both subjective impressions and previous research with monolingual listeners 
suggest that a foreign accent interferes with word recognition in infants, young 
children, and adults. However, because being exposed to multiple accents is 
likely to be an everyday occurrence in many societies, it is unexpected that 
such non-standard pronunciations would significantly impede language processing 
once the listener has experience with the relevant accent. Indeed, we report 
that 24-month-olds successfully accommodate an unfamiliar accent in rapid word 
learning after less than 2 minutes of accent exposure. These results underline 
the robustness of our speech perception mechanisms, which allow listeners to 
adapt even in the absence of extensive lexical knowledge and clear known-word 
referents.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01175.x
PMID: 23106727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


895. Dev Sci. 2012 Sep;15(5):688-96. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01171.x. Epub 2012 
Aug 9.

Developmental changes in the multisensory temporal binding window persist into 
adolescence.

Hillock-Dunn A(1), Wallace MT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hearing and Speech Sciences, Vanderbilt University, USA. 
ahdunn@med.unc.edu

We live in a world rich in sensory information, and consequently the brain is 
challenged with deciphering which cues from the various sensory modalities 
belong together. Determinations regarding the relatedness of sensory information 
appear to be based, at least in part, on the spatial and temporal relationships 
between the stimuli. Stimuli that are presented in close spatial and temporal 
correspondence are more likely to be associated with one another and thus 
'bound' into a single perceptual entity. While there is a robust literature 
delineating behavioral changes in perception induced by multisensory stimuli, 
maturational changes in multisensory processing, particularly in the temporal 
realm, are poorly understood. The current study examines the developmental 
progression of multisensory temporal function by analyzing responses on an 
audiovisual simultaneity judgment task in 6- to 23-year-old participants. The 
overarching hypothesis for the study was that multisensory temporal function 
will mature with increasing age, with the developmental trajectory for this 
change being the primary point of inquiry. Results indeed reveal an 
age-dependent decrease in the size of the 'multisensory temporal binding 
window', the temporal interval within which multisensory stimuli are likely to 
be perceptually bound, with changes occurring over a surprisingly protracted 
time course that extends into adolescence.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01171.x
PMCID: PMC4013750
PMID: 22925516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


896. Dev Sci. 2012 Sep;15(5):641-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01157.x. Epub 2012 
Jun 11.

Nine-month-old infants generalize object labels, but not object preferences 
across individuals.

Henderson AM(1), Woodward AL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The University of Auckland, New Zealand. 
a.henderson@auckland.ac.nz

As with all culturally relevant human behaviours, words are meaningful because 
they are shared by the members of a community. This research investigates 
whether 9-month-old infants understand this fundamental fact about language. 
Experiment 1 examined whether infants who are trained on, and subsequently 
habituated to, a new word-referent link expect the link to be consistent across 
a second speaker. Experiment 2 examined whether 9-month-old infants distinguish 
between behaviours that are shared across individuals (i.e. words) from those 
that are not (i.e. object preferences). The present findings indicate that 
infants as young as 9 months of age expect new word-referent links, but not 
object preferences, to be consistent across individuals. Thus, by 9 months, 
infants have identified at least one of the aspects of human behaviour that is 
shared across individuals within a community. The implications for children's 
acquisition of language and culture are discussed.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01157.x
PMCID: PMC3430974
PMID: 22925512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


897. Dev Sci. 2012 Jul;15(4):589-600. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01156.x.

Connecting neural coding to number cognition: a computational account.

Prather RW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Psychological Sciences, Indiana University, USA. 
rwprathe@indiana.edu

The current study presents a series of computational simulations that 
demonstrate how the neural coding of numerical magnitude may influence number 
cognition and development. This includes behavioral phenomena cataloged in 
cognitive literature such as the development of numerical estimation and 
operational momentum. Though neural research has begun to describe neural coding 
of number, it is unclear how specific characteristics of the neural coding may 
relate to the expansive list of behavioral phenomena in the development of 
number cognition. The following study considers several possibilities.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01156.x
PMCID: PMC3749066
PMID: 22709407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


898. Dev Sci. 2012 Jul;15(4):569-78. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01152.x.

The role of children's negative attributions on depressive symptoms: an 
inherited characteristic or a product of the early environment?

Lau JY(1), Belli SD, Gregory AM, Napolitano M, Eley TC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 
jennifer.lau@psy.ox.ac.uk

Negative attributional style has been associated with depressive symptoms in 
children. Yet, it is unclear whether these cognitive biases reflect inherited 
characteristics of the broader depressive phenotype or are a product of 
children's environments. While existing data in adolescents show that negative 
attributions reflect a genetic predisposition, elevating depressive responses to 
stress, other data suggest that negative attributions in children are more 
likely to reflect early environmental experiences on symptoms. Here, we assess 
the degree to which negative attributional style and depressive symptoms arise 
from common genetic, shared and non-shared environmental influences in 
childhood. Monozygotic and dizygotic twins reported on attributional style and 
depressive symptoms at age 8 (n = 300 pairs) and at age 10 (n = 250 pairs). Two 
multivariate models with varying assumptions on the nature of the relationship 
between negative attributions and depressive symptoms within and across time 
were fit to the data. The Common Pathway model provided better fit than the 
Cholesky decomposition. A common, latent factor influenced both attributional 
style and depressive symptoms at both time-points in children. The only 
significant influences on this factor were shared and non-shared aspects of the 
environment. Placing the present findings with those of adolescents suggests 
possible developmental differences in the relationship between attributional 
style and depressive symptoms.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01152.x
PMID: 22709405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


899. Dev Sci. 2012 Jul;15(4):528-39. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01148.x. Epub 2012 
Apr 21.

Development of visual working memory precision in childhood.

Burnett Heyes S(1), Zokaei N, van der Staaij I, Bays PM, Husain M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 
burstephanie@gmail.com

Visual working memory (VWM) is the facility to hold in mind visual information 
for brief periods of time. Developmental studies have suggested an increase 
during childhood in the maximum number of complete items that can simultaneously 
be stored in VWM. Here, we exploit a recent theoretical and empirical innovation 
to investigate instead the precision with which items are stored in VWM, where 
precision is a continuous measure reflecting VWM resolution. Ninety boys aged 7 
to 13 years completed one-item and three-item VWM tasks in which stimuli were 
coloured bars varying in orientation. On each trial, participants used a 
rotating dial to reproduce the probed stimulus from memory. Results show linear 
age-related improvement in recall precision for both one-item and three-item VWM 
tasks. However, even the youngest age group stored a significant amount of 
information about all three items on the difficult 3-item VWM task. Importantly, 
the development of VWM precision was not accounted for by development on a 
sensorimotor control task. Whereas storage of a single complete item was 
previously thought to be well within the capacity limitations of the current age 
range, these results suggest protracted development during childhood and early 
adolescence in the resolution with which single and multiple items are stored in 
VWM. Probabilistic modelling of response distribution data suggests that 
improvement in VWM performance is attributable to a specific decrease in 
variability of stored feature representations, rather than to a decrease in 
misbinding or random noise. As such, we highlight a novel, potentially 
developmentally plausible mechanism that may underlie developmental improvement 
in VWM performance, independent of any alterations in the maximum number of 
complete items which can be stored.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01148.x
PMCID: PMC3401951
PMID: 22709402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


900. Dev Sci. 2012 May;15(3):448-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01140.x. Epub 2012 
Feb 23.

Word learning in deaf children with cochlear implants: effects of early auditory 
experience.

Houston DM(1), Stewart J, Moberly A, Hollich G, Miyamoto RT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology – Head & Neck Surgery, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. dmhousto@indiana.edu

Word-learning skills were tested in normal-hearing 12- to 40-month-olds and in 
deaf 22- to 40-month-olds 12 to 18 months after cochlear implantation. Using the 
Intermodal Preferential Looking Paradigm (IPLP), children were tested for their 
ability to learn two novel-word/novel-object pairings. Normal-hearing children 
demonstrated learning on this task at approximately 18 months of age and older. 
For deaf children, performance on this task was significantly correlated with 
early auditory experience: Children whose cochlear implants were switched on by 
14 months of age or who had relatively more hearing before implantation 
demonstrated learning in this task, but later implanted profoundly deaf children 
did not. Performance on this task also correlated with later measures of 
vocabulary size. Taken together, these findings suggest that early auditory 
experience facilitates word learning and that the IPLP may be useful for 
identifying children who may be at high risk for poor vocabulary development.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01140.x
PMCID: PMC3573691
PMID: 22490184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


901. Dev Sci. 2012 May;15(3):426-35. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01139.x. Epub 2012 
Feb 29.

Dynamic pointing triggers shifts of visual attention in young infants.

Rohlfing KJ(1), Longo MR, Bertenthal BI.

Author information:
(1)Emergentist Semantics Group, Bielefeld University, Cognitive Interaction 
Technology (CITEC), Universitätsstrasse 21–23, 33615 Bielefeld, Germany. 
kjr@uni-bielefeld.de

Pointing, like eye gaze, is a deictic gesture that can be used to orient the 
attention of another person towards an object or an event. Previous research 
suggests that infants first begin to follow a pointing gesture between 10 and 13 
months of age. We investigated whether sensitivity to pointing could be seen at 
younger ages employing a technique recently used to show early sensitivity to 
perceived eye gaze. Three experiments were conducted with 4.5- and 6.5-month-old 
infants. Our first goal was to examine whether these infants could show a 
systematic response to pointing by shifting their visual attention in the 
direction of a pointing gesture when we eliminated the difficulty of disengaging 
fixation from a pointing hand. The results from Experiments 1 and 2 suggest that 
a dynamic, but not a static, pointing gesture triggers shifts of visual 
attention in infants as young as 4.5 months of age. Our second goal was to 
clarify whether this response was based on sensitivity to the directional 
posture of the pointing hand, the motion of the pointing hand, or both. The 
results from Experiment 3 suggest that the direction of motion is necessary but 
not sufficient to orient infants' attention toward a distal target. Infants 
shifted their attention in the direction of the pointing finger, but only when 
the hand was moving in the same direction. These results suggest that infants 
are prepared to orient to the distal referent of a pointing gesture which likely 
contributes to their learning the communicative function of pointing.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01139.x
PMID: 22490182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


902. Dev Sci. 2012 May;15(3):408-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01137.x. Epub 2012 
Feb 23.

Circadian rhythms in executive function during the transition to adolescence: 
the effect of synchrony between chronotype and time of day.

Hahn C(1), Cowell JM, Wiprzycka UJ, Goldstein D, Ralph M, Hasher L, Zelazo PD.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cognitive Neurosicence, Ruhr University Bochum, Germany.

To explore the influence of circadian rhythms on executive function during early 
adolescence, we administered a battery of executive function measures (including 
a Go-Nogo task, the Iowa Gambling Task, a Self-ordered Pointing task, and an 
Intra/Extradimensional Shift task) to Morning-preference and Evening-preference 
participants (N = 80) between the ages of 11 and 14 years who were tested in the 
morning or afternoon. Significant Chronotype × Time of Day interactions 
(controlling for amount of sleep the previous night) revealed that adolescents 
tested at their optimal times of day performed better than those tested at their 
nonoptimal times. Implications for our understanding of physiological arousal, 
sleep, and executive function during adolescence are discussed.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01137.x
PMCID: PMC4103784
PMID: 22490180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


903. Dev Sci. 2012 May;15(3):330-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01130.x. Epub 2012 
Feb 28.

Electrophysiological evidence for late maturation of strategic episodic 
retrieval processes.

Sprondel V(1), Kipp KH, Mecklinger A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Saarland University, Germany. 
V.Sprondel@mx.uni-saarland.de

Improvement in source memory performance throughout development is thought to be 
mediated by strategic processes that facilitate the retrieval of task-relevant 
information. Using event-related potentials (ERPs), we examined developmental 
changes in these processes during adolescence. Adolescents (13-14 years) and 
adults (19-29 years) completed a memory exclusion task which required the 
discrimination between words studied in one color ('targets') and words studied 
in the alternative color ('non-targets') under two conditions that put different 
demands on strategic control. Memory accuracy improved with age and also 
increased with decreasing control demands in both age groups. The parietal 
old/new effect, an ERP correlate of recollection, was reliable for targets 
across conditions in both age groups. By contrast, ERP correlates of non-target 
recollection were present in adolescents across conditions but not in adults. 
This suggests that adults implemented a strategy to prioritize recollection of 
target information with greater success than adolescents regardless of control 
demands, presumably reflecting maturational differences in cognitive control. In 
support of this view, the ERP amplitude difference between targets and 
non-targets was positively correlated with a measure of working memory capacity 
(WMC) in adults but not in adolescents. A further age-related difference was 
that ERP correlates of post-retrieval processing, including late right-frontal 
old/new effects and late posterior negativities, were observed in adults only. 
Together, our data suggest protracted maturation in the strategic processes that 
underlie selective recollection and post-retrieval control.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01130.x
PMID: 22490174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


904. Dev Sci. 2012 May;15(3):307-19. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01128.x.

Amygdala response to mother.

Tottenham N(1), Shapiro M, Telzer EH, Humphreys KL.

Author information:
(1)University of California, Los Angeles, Department of Psychology, Box 951563, 
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. nimtottenham@ucla.edu

In altricial species, like the human, the caregiver, very often the mother, is 
one of the most potent stimuli during development. The distinction between 
mothers and other adults is learned early in life and results in numerous 
behaviors in the child, most notably mother-approach and stranger wariness. The 
current study examined the influence of the maternal stimulus on amygdala 
activity and related circuitry in 25 developing children (n = 13) and 
adolescents (n = 12), and how this circuitry was associated with 
attachment-related behaviors. Results indicated that maternal stimuli were 
especially effective in recruiting activity in the left dorsal amygdala, and 
activity in this amygdala region showed increased functional connectivity with 
evaluative and motor regions during viewing of maternal stimuli. Increases in 
this left dorsal amygdala activity and related amygdala-cortical functional 
connectivity were associated with increased mother-approach behaviors as 
measured by in-scanner behavioral responding and out-of-scanner child-report. 
Moreover, age-related changes in amygdala activity to strangers statistically 
mediated the developmentally typical decline in stranger wariness seen across 
this period. These results suggest that mother-induced behaviors are enacted by 
maternal influence on amygdala-cortical circuitry during childhood and 
adolescence.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01128.x
PMCID: PMC3522470
PMID: 22490172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


905. Dev Sci. 2012 May;15(3):299-306. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01123.x. Epub 
2012 Mar 1.

Reduced looming sensitivity in primary school children with Developmental 
Co-ordination Disorder.

Purcell C(1), Wann JP, Wilmut K, Poulter D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Royal Holloway, University of London, UK. 
Catherine.Purcell.2008@live.rhul.ac.uk

Almost all locomotor animals are sensitive to optical expansion (visual looming) 
and for most animals this sensitivity is evident very early in their 
development. In humans there is evidence that responses to looming stimuli begin 
in the first 6 weeks of life, but here we demonstrate that as children become 
independent their perceptual acuity needs to be 50 to 100 times better than has 
been demonstrated in infants in order to be skilful at collision avoidance at a 
roadside. We have recently established that sensitivity to the detection of 
visual looming in 6- to 11-year-old children is significantly below that of 
adults (Wann, Poulter & Purcell, 2011). Here, using comparable methods, we 
explore looming detection sensitivity in children with Developmental 
Co-ordination Disorder (DCD), who show broad patterns of impairment in 
visuo-motor control. We presented visual simulations of approaching vehicles, 
scaled to represent different approach rates, to children with DCD aged between 
6 and 11 years (n = 11) and typically developing age and gender matched controls 
(n = 11). Looming detection thresholds were measured under foveal and perifoveal 
viewing conditions, for isotropic expansion and isotropic expansion with 
simulated viewpoint motion. Our results show that there are situations in which 
children with DCD may fail to detect vehicles approaching at speeds in excess of 
22 km/h, suggesting a developmental immaturity in looming sensitivity. This 
provides one of the first clear demonstrations of low-level motion processing 
deficits in children with DCD. The decrement observed may give rise to potential 
errors in the road crossing behaviour of these children, whereby approaching 
vehicles could be perceived as stationary. These findings further contribute 
towards understanding the adverse statistic that children under 9 years of age 
are four times more likely than adults to be involved in a road accident as a 
pedestrian.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01123.x
PMID: 22490171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


906. Dev Sci. 2012 Mar;15(2):281-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01125.x. Epub 2011 
Dec 3.

Face-to-face interference in typical and atypical development.

Riby DM(1), Doherty-Sneddon G, Whittle L.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Newcastle University, Newcastle uponTyne NE1 7RU, UK. 
deborah.riby@ncl.ac.uk

Visual communication cues facilitate interpersonal communication. It is 
important that we look at faces to retrieve and subsequently process such cues. 
It is also important that we sometimes look away from faces as they increase 
cognitive load that may interfere with online processing. Indeed, when typically 
developing individuals hold face gaze it interferes with task completion. In 
this novel study we quantify face interference for the first time in Williams 
syndrome (WS) and Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). These disorders of development 
impact on cognition and social attention, but how do faces interfere with 
cognitive processing? Individuals developing typically as well as those with ASD 
(n = 19) and WS (n = 16) were recorded during a question and answer session that 
involved mathematics questions. In phase 1 gaze behaviour was not manipulated, 
but in phase 2 participants were required to maintain eye contact with the 
experimenter at all times. Looking at faces decreased task accuracy for 
individuals who were developing typically. Critically, the same pattern was seen 
in WS and ASD, whereby task performance decreased when participants were 
required to hold face gaze. The results show that looking at faces interferes 
with task performance in all groups. This finding requires the caveat that 
individuals with WS and ASD found it harder than individuals who were developing 
typically to maintain eye contact throughout the interaction. Individuals with 
ASD struggled to hold eye contact at all points of the interaction while those 
with WS found it especially difficult when thinking.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01125.x
PMCID: PMC3627295
PMID: 22356183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


907. Dev Sci. 2012 Mar;15(2):222-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01120.x. Epub 2011 
Nov 24.

How dogs know when communication is intended for them.

Kaminski J(1), Schulz L, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany. 
kaminski@eva.mpg.de

Domestic dogs comprehend human gestural communication in a way that other animal 
species do not. But little is known about the specific cues they use to 
determine when human communication is intended for them. In a series of four 
studies, we confronted both adult dogs and young dog puppies with object choice 
tasks in which a human indicated one of two opaque cups by either pointing to it 
or gazing at it. We varied whether the communicator made eye contact with the 
dog in association with the gesture (or whether her back was turned or her eyes 
were directed at another recipient) and whether the communicator called the 
dog's name (or the name of another recipient). Results demonstrated the 
importance of eye contact in human-dog communication, and, to a lesser extent, 
the calling of the dog's name--with no difference between adult dogs and young 
puppies--which are precisely the communicative cues used by human infants for 
identifying communicative intent. Unlike human children, however, dogs did not 
seem to comprehend the human's communicative gesture when it was directed to 
another human, perhaps because dogs view all human communicative acts as 
directives for the recipient.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01120.x
PMID: 22356178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


908. Dev Sci. 2012 Mar;15(2):204-11. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01117.x. Epub 2011 
Nov 23.

Maturation of rapid auditory temporal processing and subsequent nonword 
repetition performance in children.

Fox AM(1), Reid CL, Anderson M, Richardson C, Bishop DV.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Western Australia, Australia. 
allison.fox@uwa.edu.au

According to the rapid auditory processing theory, the ability to parse incoming 
auditory information underpins learning of oral and written language. There is 
wide variation in this low-level perceptual ability, which appears to follow a 
protracted developmental course. We studied the development of rapid auditory 
processing using event-related potentials (ERPs) elicited by tone pairs 
presented at varying inter-stimulus intervals (25, 50, 100, 200, and 400 ms) in 
a sample of children (N = 103) aged 7-9 years initially and again at 9-11 years. 
We also assessed their ability to repeat nonsense words at both time-points. The 
amount of difference between the ERP to single tones and paired tones (as 
assessed by the intra-class correlation coefficient, ICC) provided a measure of 
the brain's capacity to discriminate auditory information delivered at different 
presentation rates. Results showed that older children showed greater neural 
discrimination to tone pairs than younger children at rapid presentation rates, 
although these differences were reduced at slower presentation rates. The ICC at 
time 1 significantly predicted nonword repetition scores two years later, 
providing support for the view that rapid auditory temporal processing ability 
affects oral language development in typically developing children.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01117.x
PMID: 22356176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


909. Dev Sci. 2012 Mar;15(2):181-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01103.x. Epub 2011 
Nov 2.

False-belief understanding in 2.5-year-olds: evidence from two novel verbal 
spontaneous-response tasks.

Scott RM(1), He Z, Baillargeon R, Cummins D.

Author information:
(1)School of Social Sciences, Humanities and Arts, University of California 
Merced, USA.

Recent research indicates that toddlers and infants succeed at various 
non-verbal spontaneous-response false-belief tasks; here we asked whether 
toddlers would also succeed at verbal spontaneous-response false-belief tasks 
that imposed significant linguistic demands. We tested 2.5-year-olds using two 
novel tasks: a preferential-looking task in which children listened to a 
false-belief story while looking at a picture book (with matching and 
non-matching pictures), and a violation-of-expectation task in which children 
watched an adult 'Subject' answer (correctly or incorrectly) a standard 
false-belief question. Positive results were obtained with both tasks, despite 
their linguistic demands. These results (1) support the distinction between 
spontaneous- and elicited-response tasks by showing that toddlers succeed at 
verbal false-belief tasks that do not require them to answer direct questions 
about agents' false beliefs, (2) reinforce claims of robust continuity in early 
false-belief understanding as assessed by spontaneous-response tasks, and (3) 
provide researchers with new experimental tasks for exploring early false-belief 
understanding in neurotypical and autistic populations.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01103.x
PMCID: PMC3292198
PMID: 22356174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


910. Dev Sci. 2012 Jan;15(1):150-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01115.x. Epub 2011 
Nov 2.

Genetically influenced change in sensation seeking drives the rise of delinquent 
behavior during adolescence.

Harden KP(1), Quinn PD, Tucker-Drob EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The University of Texas at Austin, 1 University 
Station A8000, Austin, Texas 78712, USA. harden@psy.utexas.edu

Sensation seeking is associated with an increased propensity for delinquency, 
and emerging research on personality change suggests that mean levels of 
sensation seeking increase substantially from childhood to adolescence. The 
current study tested whether individual differences in the rate of change of 
sensation seeking predicted within-person change in delinquent behavior and 
whether genetically influenced differences in rate of personality change 
accounted for this association. Sensation seeking and delinquent behavior were 
assessed biennially between ages 10-11 and 16-17 in a nationally representative 
sample of 7675 youths from the National Longitudinal Study of Youth: Children 
and Young Adults (CNLSY). Analyses using latent growth curve modeling found that 
within-person change in sensation seeking was significantly and positively 
correlated with within-person change in delinquency from childhood to 
adolescence. Furthermore, behavioral genetic analyses of a subset of 2562 
sibling pairs indicated that there were substantial genetic influences on both 
initial levels of sensation seeking and change in sensation seeking during early 
adolescence, with over 80% of individual differences in change due to genetic 
factors. Finally, these genetically driven increases in sensation seeking were 
most important for predicting increases in delinquency, whereas environmental 
paths between sensation seeking and delinquency were not significant. These 
results suggest that developmental changes in delinquent behaviors during 
adolescence are driven by a genetically governed process of personality change.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01115.x
PMCID: PMC3261521
PMID: 22251301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


911. Dev Sci. 2012 Jan;15(1):99-112. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01097.x. Epub 2011 
Nov 3.

Genetic and environmental relationships between head circumference growth in the 
first year of life and sociocognitive development in the second year: a 
longitudinal twin study.

Fujisawa KK(1), Ozaki K, Suzuki K, Yamagata S, Kawahashi I, Ando J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Education, Faculty of Letters, Keio University, Mita 2-15-45, 
Tokyo 108-8345, Japan. fujisawa@flet.keio.ac.jp

Erratum in
    Dev Sci. 2015 Nov;18(6):1054.

Although growth in head circumference (HC) during infancy is known to predict 
later childhood outcomes, the mechanisms underlying this association with later 
sociocognitive abilities remain undetermined. Thus, using a sample of 241 pairs 
of normally developing Japanese twins, this study investigated the underpinnings 
of the association between HC growth (difference between HC at birth and at 10 
months) and sociocognitive abilities at 19 months as measured by 10 items from 
the M-CHAT. Phenotypic correlations between HC at birth and sociocognitive 
abilities and between HC growth and sociocognitive abilities were marginal and 
not significant. However, multivariate genetic analyses using Cholesky 
decomposition revealed that genetic influences on HC growth and those on 
sociocognitive abilities were negatively associated. On the other hand, shared 
and nonshared environmental influences on HC growth were positively associated 
with influences on sociocognitive abilities. Genetic and environmental 
influences on HC at birth were not significantly associated with influences on 
sociocognitive abilities. These results help to clarify the role of brain growth 
during infancy in the subsequent development of sociocognitive abilities and 
highlight the importance of examining the different roles of genetic and 
environmental influences in studies of these areas.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01097.x
PMID: 22251296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


912. Dev Sci. 2012 Jan;15(1):74-86. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01104.x. Epub 2011 
Nov 2.

Visually guided step descent in children with Williams syndrome.

Cowie D(1), Braddick O, Atkinson J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Goldsmiths, University of London, New Cross, London 
SE14 6NW, UK. d.cowie@gold.ac.uk

Individuals with Williams syndrome (WS) have impairments in visuospatial tasks 
and in manual visuomotor control, consistent with parietal and cerebellar 
abnormalities. Here we examined whether individuals with WS also have 
difficulties in visually controlling whole-body movements. We investigated 
visual control of stepping down at a change of level in children with WS 
(5-16-year-olds), who descended a single step while their movement was 
kinematically recorded. On each trial step height was set unpredictably, so that 
visual information was necessary to perceive the step depth and position the 
legs appropriately before landing. Kinematic measures established that children 
with WS did not use visual information to slow the leg at an appropriate point 
during the step. This pattern contrasts with that observed in typically 
developing 3- and 4-year-old children, implying severe impairment in whole-body 
visuomotor control in WS. For children with WS, performance was not 
significantly predicted by low-level visual or balance problems, but improved 
significantly with verbal age. The results suggest some plasticity and 
development in WS whole-body control. These data clearly show that visuospatial 
and visuomotor deficits in WS extend to the locomotor domain. Taken together 
with evidence for parietal and cerebellar abnormalities in WS, these results 
also provide new evidence for the role of these circuits in the visual control 
of whole-body movement.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01104.x
PMID: 22251294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


913. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):385-94. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00984.x.

Human newborns match tongue protrusion of disembodied human and robotic mouths.

Soussignan R(1), Courtial A, Canet P, Danon-Apter G, Nadel J.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Sciences du Goût et de l'Alimentation, CNRS UMR 6265, Dijon, 
France. robert.soussignan@u-bourgogne.fr

No evidence had been provided so far of newborns’ capacity to give a matching 
response to 2D stimuli. We report evidence from 18 newborns who were presented 
with three types of stimuli on a 2D screen. The stimuli were video-recorded 
displays of tongue protrusion shown by: (a) a human face, (b) a human tongue 
from a disembodied mouth, and (c) an artificial tongue from a robotic mouth. 
Compared to a baseline condition, neonates increased significantly their tongue 
protrusion when seeing disembodied human and artificial tongue movements, but 
not when seeing a 2D full-face protruding tongue. This result was interpreted as 
revealing the exploration of top-heavy patterns of the 2D face that distracted 
infants’ attention from the tongue. Results also showed progressively more 
accurate matching (full tongue protrusion) throughout repeated exposure to each 
kind of stimulus. Such findings are not in line with the predictions of the 
innate releasing mechanism (IRM) model or of the oral exploration hypothesis. 
They support the active intermodal mapping (AIM) hypothesis that emphasizes not 
only the importance of repeated experience, as would the associative sequence 
learning (ASL) hypothesis, but also predicts a differential learning and 
progressive correction of the response adapted to each stimulus.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00984.x
PMID: 22213907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


914. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):353-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00985.x.

Biological motion preference in humans at birth: role of dynamic and configural 
properties.

Bardi L(1), Regolin L, Simion F.

Author information:
(1)Department of General Psychology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. 
lara.bardi@unipd.it

The present study addresses the hypothesis that detection of biological motion 
is an intrinsic capacity of the visual system guided by a non-species-specific 
predisposition for the pattern of vertebrate movement and investigates the role 
of global vs. local information in biological motion detection. Two-day-old 
babies exposed to a biological motion point-light display (depicting a walking 
hen) and a non-biological motion display (a rotating rigid object) 
preferentially looked at the biological display (Experiment 1). A new group of 
newborns showed themselves to be capable of discriminating, following 
habituation, a biological motion display from a spatially scrambled version of 
it (Experiment 2). However, a third group of newborns, at their first exposure 
to such displays, did not show any preference between them (Experiment 3). 
Results confirm and extend previous comparative and developmental data, 
supporting an inborn predisposition to attend to biological motion in humans. 
This ability is presumably part of an evolutionarily ancient and 
non-species-specific system predisposing animals to preferentially attend to 
other animals.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00985.x
PMID: 22213905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


915. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):336-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00978.x.

Near-term fetuses process temporal features of speech.

Granier-Deferre C(1), Ribeiro A, Jacquet AY, Bassereau S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire Psychologie et Neurosciences Cognitives, CNRS, UMR 8189, 
Université Paris Descartes, Institut de Psychologie, Boulogne-Billancourt, 
France. carolyn.granier-deferre@parisdescartes.fr

The perception of speech and music requires processing of variations in spectra 
and amplitude over different time intervals. Near-term fetuses can discriminate 
acoustic features, such as frequencies and spectra, but whether they can process 
complex auditory streams, such as speech sequences and more specifically their 
temporal variations, fast or relatively slow acoustic variations, is unclear. We 
recorded the cardiac activity of 82 near-term fetuses (38 weeks GA) in quiet 
sleep during a silent control condition and four 15 s streams presented at 90 dB 
SPL Leq: two piano melodies with opposite contours, a natural Icelandic sentence 
and a chimera of the sentence--all its spectral information was replaced with 
broadband noise, leaving its specific temporal variations in amplitude intact 
without any phonological information. All stimuli elicited a heart rate 
deceleration. The response patterns to the melodies were the same and differed 
significantly from those observed with the Icelandic sentence and its chimera, 
which did not differ. The melodies elicited a monophasic heart rate 
deceleration, indicating a stimulus orienting reflex while the Icelandic and its 
chimera evoked a sustained lower magnitude response, indicating a sustained 
attentional response or more focused information processing. A conservative 
interpretation of the data is that near-term fetuses can perceive sound streams 
and the rapid temporal variations in amplitude that are specific to speech 
sounds with no spectral variations at all.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00978.x
PMID: 22213904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


916. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):327-35. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00979.x.

Using mu rhythm desynchronization to measure mirror neuron activity in infants.

Nyström P(1), Ljunghammar T, Rosander K, von Hofsten C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. 
par@interactivesolutions.se

The Mirror Neuron System hypothesis stating that observed actions are projected 
onto the observer’s own action system assigns an important role to development, 
because only actions mastered by the observer can be mirrored. The purpose of 
the present study was to investigate whether there is evidence of a functioning 
mirror neuron system (MNS) in 8-month-old infants. High-density EEG was used to 
assess the mu rhythm desynchronization in an action observation task where the 
infants observed a live model. To reduce noise, ICA decompositions were used. 
The results show a higher desynchronization of the mu rhythm when infants 
observed a goal-directed action than when they observed a spatially similar 
non-goal-directed movement. The localizations of the sources are in agreement 
with those proposed by the MNS hypothesis. This indicates that the MNS is 
functioning at this age.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00979.x
PMID: 22213903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


917. Dev Sci. 2011 Nov;14(6):1459-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01090.x. Epub 
2011 Sep 24.

The role of socio-communicative rearing environments in the development of 
social and physical cognition in apes.

Russell JL(1), Lyn H, Schaeffer JA, Hopkins WD.

Author information:
(1)Division of Psychobiology, Yerkes National Primate Research Center, USA.

The cultural intelligence hypothesis (CIH) claims that humans' advanced 
cognition is a direct result of human culture and that children are uniquely 
specialized to absorb and utilize this cultural experience (Tomasello, 2000). 
Comparative data demonstrating that 2.5-year-old human children outperform apes 
on measures of social cognition but not on measures of physical cognition 
support this claim (Herrmann et al., 2007). However, the previous study failed 
to control for rearing when comparing these two species. Specifically, the human 
children were raised in a human culture whereas the apes were raised in standard 
sanctuary settings. To further explore the CIH, here we compared the performance 
on multiple measures of social and physical cognition in a group of standard 
reared apes raised in conditions typical of zoo and biomedical laboratory 
settings to that of apes reared in an enculturated socio-communicatively rich 
environment. Overall, the enculturated apes significantly outperformed their 
standard reared counterparts on the cognitive tasks and this was particularly 
true for measures of communication. Furthermore, the performance of the 
enculturated apes was very similar to previously reported data from 2.5-year-old 
children. We conclude that apes who are reared in a human-like 
socio-communicatively rich environment develop superior communicative abilities 
compared to apes reared in standard laboratory settings, which supports some 
assumptions of the cultural intelligence hypothesis.

2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01090.x
PMCID: PMC3198823
PMID: 22010903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


918. Dev Sci. 2011 Nov;14(6):1417-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01088.x. Epub 
2011 Oct 4.

Children's spatial thinking: does talk about the spatial world matter?

Pruden SM(1), Levine SC, Huttenlocher J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33199, 
USA. shannon.pruden@fiu.edu

In this paper we examine the relations between parent spatial language input, 
children's own production of spatial language, and children's later spatial 
abilities. Using a longitudinal study design, we coded the use of spatial 
language (i.e. words describing the spatial features and properties of objects; 
e.g. big, tall, circle, curvy, edge) from child age 14 to 46 months in a diverse 
sample of 52 parent-child dyads interacting in their home settings. These same 
children were given three non-verbal spatial tasks, items from a Spatial 
Transformation task (Levine et al., 1999), the Block Design subtest from the 
WPPSI-III (Wechsler, 2002), and items on the Spatial Analogies subtest from 
Primary Test of Cognitive Skills (Huttenlocher & Levine, 1990) at 54 months of 
age. We find that parents vary widely in the amount of spatial language they use 
with their children during everyday interactions. This variability in spatial 
language input, in turn, predicts the amount of spatial language children 
produce, controlling for overall parent language input. Furthermore, children 
who produce more spatial language are more likely to perform better on spatial 
problem solving tasks at a later age.

2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01088.x
PMCID: PMC3372906
PMID: 22010900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


919. Dev Sci. 2011 Nov;14(6):1379-92. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01083.x. Epub 
2011 Sep 17.

Stronger neural dynamics capture changes in infants' visual working memory 
capacity over development.

Perone S(1), Simmering VR, Spencer JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Delta Center, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 
52242, USA. sammy-perone@uiowa.edu

Visual working memory (VWM) capacity has been studied extensively in adults, and 
methodological advances have enabled researchers to probe capacity limits in 
infancy using a preferential looking paradigm. Evidence suggests that capacity 
increases rapidly between 6 and 10 months of age. To understand how the VWM 
system develops, we must understand the relationship between the looking 
behavior used to study VWM and underlying cognitive processes. We present a 
dynamic neural field model that captures both real-time and developmental 
processes underlying performance. Three simulation experiments show how looking 
is linked to VWM processes during infancy and how developmental changes in 
performance could arise through increasing neural connectivity. These results 
provide insight into the sources of capacity limits and VWM development more 
generally.

2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01083.x
PMCID: PMC3665414
PMID: 22010897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


920. Dev Sci. 2011 Nov;14(6):1365-78. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01086.x. Epub 
2011 Sep 9.

Early sex differences in weighting geometric cues.

Lourenco SF(1), Addy D, Huttenlocher J, Fabian L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. 
stella.lourenco@emory.edu

When geometric and non-geometric information are both available for specifying 
location, men have been shown to rely more heavily on geometry compared to 
women. To shed insight on the nature and developmental origins of this sex 
difference, we examined how 18- to 24-month-olds represented the geometry of a 
surrounding (rectangular) space when direct non-geometric information (i.e. a 
beacon) was also available for localizing a hidden object. Children were tested 
on a disorientation task with multiple phases. Across experiments, boys relied 
more heavily than girls on geometry to guide localization, as indicated by their 
errors during the initial phase of the task, and by their search choices 
following transformations that left only geometry available, or that, under 
limited conditions, created a conflict between beacon and geometry. Analyses of 
search times suggested that girls, like boys, had encoded geometry, and testing 
in a square space ruled out explanations concerned with motivational and 
methodological variables. Taken together, the findings provide evidence for an 
early sex difference in the weighting of geometry. This sex difference, we 
suggest, reflects subtle variation in how boys and girls approach the problem of 
combining multiple sources of location information.

2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01086.x
PMID: 22010896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


921. Dev Sci. 2011 Nov;14(6):1355-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01084.x. Epub 
2011 Sep 9.

Reaching experience increases face preference in 3-month-old infants.

Libertus K(1), Needham A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, USA. 
Klaus.Libertus@gmail.com

The developing infant learns about the physical and the social world by engaging 
with objects and with people. In the study reported here, we investigated the 
relationship between infants' interactions with the physical and the social 
world. Three-month-old infants were trained for 2 weeks and experienced either 
actively manipulating objects themselves or passively having objects touched to 
their hands. Following active or passive experiences, spontaneous orienting 
towards faces and objects was compared between the trained groups and untrained 
3- and 5-month-olds. It is known that the onset of reaching behavior increases 
infants' interest in objects. However, we report that active, self-produced 
reaching experiences also increase infants' spontaneous orienting towards faces, 
while passive experiences do not affect orienting behavior. Regression analyses 
provide evidence for a link between manual engagement and the development of 
orienting towards faces. Implications of orienting towards faces for the 
development of triadic interactions, joint attention, and social cognition in 
general are discussed.

2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01084.x
PMCID: PMC3888836
PMID: 22010895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


922. Dev Sci. 2011 Nov;14(6):1340-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01091.x. Epub 
2011 Sep 24.

Specifying theories of developmental dyslexia: a diffusion model analysis of 
word recognition.

Zeguers MH(1), Snellings P, Tijms J, Weeda WD, Tamboer P, Bexkens A, Huizenga 
HM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
m.h.t.zeguers@uva.nl

The nature of word recognition difficulties in developmental dyslexia is still a 
topic of controversy. We investigated the contribution of phonological 
processing deficits and uncertainty to the word recognition difficulties of 
dyslexic children by mathematical diffusion modeling of visual and auditory 
lexical decision data. The first study showed that poor visual lexical decision 
performance of reading disabled children was mainly due to a delay in the 
evaluation of word characteristics, suggesting impaired phonological processing. 
The adoption of elevated certainty criteria by the disabled readers suggests 
that uncertainty contributed to the visual word recognition impairments as well. 
The second study replicated the outcomes for visual lexical decision with 
formally diagnosed dyslexic children. In addition, during auditory lexical 
decision, dyslexics presented with reduced accuracy, which also resulted from 
delayed evaluation of word characteristics. Since orthographic influences are 
diminished during auditory lexical decision, this strengthens the phonological 
processing deficit account. Dyslexic children did not adopt heightened certainty 
criteria during auditory lexical decision, indicating that uncertainty solely 
impairs reading and not listening.

2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01091.x
PMID: 22010894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


923. Dev Sci. 2011 Nov;14(6):1261-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01075.x. Epub 
2011 Sep 15.

Age and experience shape developmental changes in the neural basis of 
language-related learning.

McNealy K(1), Mazziotta JC, Dapretto M.

Author information:
(1)Ahmanson-Lovelace Brain Mapping Center, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and 
Human Behavior, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Very little is known about the neural underpinnings of language learning across 
the lifespan and how these might be modified by maturational and experiential 
factors. Building on behavioral research highlighting the importance of early 
word segmentation (i.e. the detection of word boundaries in continuous speech) 
for subsequent language learning, here we characterize developmental changes in 
brain activity as this process occurs online, using data collected in a mixed 
cross-sectional and longitudinal design. One hundred and fifty-six participants, 
ranging from age 5 to adulthood, underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) while listening to three novel streams of continuous speech, which 
contained either strong statistical regularities, strong statistical 
regularities and speech cues, or weak statistical regularities providing minimal 
cues to word boundaries. All age groups displayed significant signal increases 
over time in temporal cortices for the streams with high statistical 
regularities; however, we observed a significant right-to-left shift in the 
laterality of these learning-related increases with age. Interestingly, only the 
5- to 10-year-old children displayed significant signal increases for the stream 
with low statistical regularities, suggesting an age-related decrease in 
sensitivity to more subtle statistical cues. Further, in a sample of 78 
10-year-olds, we examined the impact of proficiency in a second language and 
level of pubertal development on learning-related signal increases, showing that 
the brain regions involved in language learning are influenced by both 
experiential and maturational factors.

2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01075.x
PMCID: PMC3717169
PMID: 22010887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


924. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1220-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01069.x. Epub 
2011 Jul 25.

The development of a greeting signal in wild chimpanzees.

Laporte MN(1), Zuberbühler K.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of St Andrews, Scotland, UK.

Adult chimpanzees produce a unique vocal signal, the pant-grunt, when 
encountering higher-ranking group members. The behaviour is typically directed 
to a specific receiver and has thus been interpreted as a 'greeting' signal. The 
alpha male obtains a large share of these calls, followed by the other adult 
males of the group. In this study, we describe the development of pant-grunting 
behaviour from the first grunt-like calls of newborn babies to the fully 
developed pant-grunts in adults. Although babies produce grunts from very early 
on, they are not directed to others until about 2 months of age. Subsequently, 
socially directed grunting steadily increases in frequency to peak around 7 
months of age, but then decreases again to reach a nadir in older infants and 
juveniles, while the specificity in use increases. During adolescence, grunt 
production increases again with grunts given most frequently to socially 
relevant individuals. As young chimpanzees are closely affiliated to their 
mothers for the first decade of their lives, we also compared the grunting 
patterns of mothers and their offspring, which revealed some influences in 
pant-grunt production. In conclusion, the acquisition of pant-grunting behaviour 
in chimpanzees is a long-lasting process with distinct developmental phases in 
which social influences by the mother and other group members are likely to play 
a role.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01069.x
PMID: 21884337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


925. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1207-19. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01073.x.

Interactions between statistical and semantic information in infant language 
development.

Lany J(1), Saffran JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, 
USA. jlany@nd.edu

Infants can use statistical regularities to form rudimentary word categories 
(e.g. noun, verb), and to learn the meanings common to words from those 
categories. Using an artificial language methodology, we probed the mechanisms 
by which two types of statistical cues (distributional and phonological 
regularities) affect word learning. Because linking distributional cues vs. 
phonological information to semantics make different computational demands on 
learners, we also tested whether their use is related to language proficiency. 
We found that 22-month-old infants with smaller vocabularies generalized using 
phonological cues; however, infants with larger vocabularies showed the opposite 
pattern of results, generalizing based on distributional cues. These findings 
suggest that both phonological and distributional cues marking word categories 
promote early word learning. Moreover, while correlations between these cues are 
important to forming word categories, we found infants' weighting of these cues 
in subsequent word-learning tasks changes over the course of early language 
development.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01073.x
PMCID: PMC3867528
PMID: 21884336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


926. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1161-75. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01068.x. Epub 
2011 Jul 13.

Modeling a cascade of effects: the role of speed and executive functioning in 
preterm/full-term differences in academic achievement.

Rose SA(1), Feldman JF, Jankowski JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kennedy Center, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine/Children's Hospital at Montefiore, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. 
susan.rose@einstein.yu.edu

This study identified deficits in executive functioning in pre-adolescent 
preterms and modeled their role, along with processing speed, in explaining 
preterm/full-term differences in reading and mathematics. Preterms (< 1750 g) 
showed deficits at 11 years on a battery of tasks tapping the three basic 
executive functions identified by Miyake - updating/working memory, inhibition, 
and shifting. Confirmatory factor analysis showed that these executive 
functions, though correlated, were distinct from one another and from processing 
speed, which later proved to account for much of the intercorrelation among 
executive functions. In the best-fitting structural equation model, the negative 
effects of prematurity on achievement were completely mediated by the three 
executive functions and speed in a cascade of effects: prematurity → slower 
processing speed → poorer executive functioning (working memory) → lower 
achievement in math and reading.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01068.x
PMID: 21884331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


927. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1142-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01065.x. Epub 2011 
Jul 20.

Symbolic play connects to language through visual object recognition.

Smith LB(1), Jones SS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana 
University-Bloomington, IN 47405, USA. smith4@indiana.edu

Object substitutions in play (e.g. using a box as a car) are strongly linked to 
language learning and their absence is a diagnostic marker of language delay. 
Classic accounts posit a symbolic function that underlies both words and object 
substitutions. Here we show that object substitutions depend on developmental 
changes in visual object recognition: 18- to 30-month old children (n = 63) 
substitute objects in play after they have developed the adult-like ability to 
recognize common objects from sparse models of their geometric structure. These 
developmental changes in object recognition are a better predictor of object 
substitutions than language or age. A developmental pathway connecting visual 
object recognition, object name learning, and symbolic play is proposed in which 
object substitutions are like the canary in the coal mine: they are not causally 
related to language delay, but their absence is an easily detected signal of a 
problem in language acquisition.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01065.x
PMCID: PMC3482824
PMID: 21884329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


928. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1002-11. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01052.x. Epub 
2011 Apr 25.

Infant ability to tell voices apart rests on language experience.

Johnson EK(1), Westrek E, Nazzi T, Cutler A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Mississauga, Canada. 
elizabeth.johnson@utoronto.ca

A visual fixation study tested whether 7-month-olds can discriminate between 
different talkers. The infants were first habituated to talkers producing 
sentences in either a familiar or unfamiliar language, then heard test sentences 
from previously unheard speakers, either in the language used for habituation, 
or in another language. When the language at test mismatched that in 
habituation, infants always noticed the change. When language remained constant 
and only talker altered, however, infants detected the change only if the 
language was the native tongue. Adult listeners with a different native tongue 
from the infants did not reproduce the discriminability patterns shown by the 
infants, and infants detected neither voice nor language changes in reversed 
speech; both these results argue against explanation of the native-language 
voice discrimination in terms of acoustic properties of the stimuli. The ability 
to identify talkers is, like many other perceptual abilities, strongly 
influenced by early life experience.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01052.x
PMID: 21884316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


929. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):944-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01043.x. Epub 2011 
Apr 28.

Indirect goal priming is more powerful than explicit instruction in children.

Kesek A(1), Cunningham WA, Packer DJ, Zelazo PD.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Child Development, University of Minnesota, MN 55455-0345, USA. 
kesek005@umn.edu

This study examined the relative efficacy of explicit instruction and indirect 
priming on young children's behavior in a task that required a series of choices 
between a small immediate reward and a larger delayed reward. One hundread and 
six 4-year-old children were randomly assigned to one of four conditions 
involving one of two goals (maximize rewards or obtain immediate rewards) and 
one of two types of instruction (indirect priming using stories or explicit 
verbal instructions). Children were more likely to make goal-congruent choices 
as a result of indirect priming, but there was no effect of explicit 
instruction, suggesting that indirect approaches to changing young children's 
behavior may be more effective than direct approaches under some circumstances. 
These results have implications for understanding the dynamic interplay between 
bottom-up and top-down influences on self-regulation early in development.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01043.x
PMID: 21884310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


930. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):799-808. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01026.x. Epub 
2010 Dec 16.

Early development of object unity: evidence for perceptual completion in 
newborns.

Valenza E(1), Bulf H.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Psicologia dello Sviluppo e della Socializzazione, Università 
degli Studi di Padova, Italy. eloisa.valenza@unipd.it

The present study aimed to investigate whether perceptual completion is 
available at birth, in the absence of any visual experience. An extremely 
underspecified kinetic visual display composed of four spatially separated 
fragments arranged to give rise to an illusory rectangle that occluded a 
vertical rod (illusory condition) or rotated so as not to elicit perceptual 
grouping (control condition) was constructed. After newborns' ability to detect 
the particular kind of rod-and-box display used in the present study had been 
probed (Experiment 1), they were habituated to the illusory rod-and-box display 
(Experiment 2), to the control display that did not contain illusory contours 
(Experiment 3), and to a standard real rod-and-box display akin to those used in 
previous infants' studies (Experiment 4). Newborns perceived the rod as a 
connected unit either in the illusory condition (Experiment 2) or in the real 
condition (Experiment 4), as documented by a preference for a broken rod over a 
complete rod during the test phase, but not when the occluder was absent 
(Experiment 3). In all experiments newborns showed no preference between the two 
test stimuli (control condition), avoiding the possibility that newborns have a 
spontaneous preference for one test display over the other. Overall, the results 
of the present study provide evidence that the ability to achieve object unity 
(1) stems from intrinsic properties of the human perceptual system and (2) is 
operative from birth, given the right conditions.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01026.x
PMID: 21676099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


931. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):769-85. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01024.x. Epub 2010 
Dec 16.

A statistical estimate of infant and toddler vocabulary size from CDI analysis.

Mayor J(1), Plunkett K.

Author information:
(1)Basque Center on Cognition, Brain, and Language (BCBL), Donostia, Spain.

For the last 20 years, developmental psychologists have measured the variability 
in lexical development of infants and toddlers using the MacArthur-Bates 
Communicative Development Inventories (CDIs) - the most widely used parental 
report forms for assessing language and communication skills in infants and 
toddlers. We show that CDI reports can serve as a basis for estimating infants' 
and toddlers'total vocabulary sizes, beyond serving as a tool for assessing 
their language development relative to other infants and toddlers. We 
investigate the link between estimated total vocabulary size and raw CDI scores 
from a mathematical perspective, using both single developmental trajectories 
and population data. The method capitalizes on robust regularities, such as the 
overlap of individual vocabularies observed across infants and toddlers, and 
takes into account both shared knowledge and idiosyncratic knowledge. This 
statistical approach enables researchers to approximate the total vocabulary 
size of an infant or a toddler, based on her raw MacArthur-Bates CDI score. 
Using the model, we propose new normative data for productive and receptive 
vocabulary in early childhood, as well as a tabulation that relates individual 
CDI measures to realistic lexical estimates. The correction required to estimate 
total vocabulary is non-linear, with a far greater impact at older ages and 
higher CDI scores. Therefore, we suggest that correlations of developmental 
indices to language skills should be made to vocabulary size as estimated by the 
model rather than to raw CDI scores.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01024.x
PMID: 21676097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


932. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):738-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01020.x. Epub 2010 
Dec 9.

Strength of default mode resting-state connectivity relates to white matter 
integrity in children.

Gordon EM(1), Lee PS, Maisog JM, Foss-Feig J, Billington ME, Vanmeter J, Vaidya 
CJ.

Author information:
(1)Interdisciplinary Program in Neuroscience, Georgetown University Medical 
Center, USA.

A default mode network of brain regions is known to demonstrate coordinated 
activity during the resting state. While the default mode network is well 
characterized in adults, few investigations have focused upon its development. 
We scanned 9-13-year-old children with diffusion tensor imaging and 
resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging. We identified resting-state 
networks using Independent Component Analysis and tested whether the functional 
connectivity between the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and posterior cingulate 
cortex (PCC) depends upon the maturation of the underlying cingulum white matter 
tract. To determine the generalizability of this relationship, we also tested 
whether functional connectivity depends on white matter maturity between 
bilateral lateral prefrontal cortex (lateral PFC) within the executive control 
network. We found a positive relationship between mPFC-PCC connectivity and 
fractional anisotropy of the cingulum bundle; this positive relationship was 
moderated by the age of the subjects such that it was stronger in older 
children. By contrast, no such structure-function relationship emerged between 
right and left lateral PFC. However, functional and structural connectivity of 
this tract related positively with cognitive speed, fluency, and set-switching 
neuropsychological measures.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01020.x
PMCID: PMC3117440
PMID: 21676094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


933. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):725-37. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01017.x. Epub 2010 
Nov 4.

Deaf and hearing children: a comparison of peripheral vision development.

Codina C(1), Buckley D, Port M, Pascalis O.

Author information:
(1)Academic Unit of Ophthalmology and Orthoptics, University of Sheffield, UK. 
C.Codina@sheffield.ac.uk

This study investigated peripheral vision (at least 30° eccentric to fixation) 
development in profoundly deaf children without cochlear implantation, and 
compared this to age-matched hearing controls as well as to deaf and hearing 
adult data. Deaf and hearing children between the ages of 5 and 15 years were 
assessed using a new, specifically paediatric designed method of static 
perimetry. The deaf group (N = 25) were 14 females and 11 males, mean age 9.92 
years (range 5-15 years). The hearing group (N = 64) were 34 females, 30 males, 
mean age 9.13 years (range 5-15 years). All participants had good visual acuity 
in both eyes (< 0.200 LogMAR). Accuracy of detection and reaction time to 
briefly presented LED stimuli of three light intensities, at eccentricities 
between 30° and 85° were measured while fixation was maintained to a central 
target. The study found reduced peripheral vision in deaf children between 5 and 
10 years of age. Deaf children (aged 5-10 years) showed slower reaction times to 
all stimuli and reduced ability to detect and accurately report dim stimuli in 
the far periphery. Deaf children performed equally to hearing children aged 
11-12 years. Deaf adolescents aged 13-15 years demonstrated faster reaction 
times to all peripheral stimuli in comparison to hearing controls. Adolescent 
results were consistent with deaf and hearing adult performances wherein deaf 
adults also showed significantly faster reaction times than hearing controls. 
Peripheral vision performance on this task was found to reach adult-like levels 
of maturity in deaf and hearing children, both in reaction time and accuracy of 
detection at the age of 11-12 years.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01017.x
PMID: 21676093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


934. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):700-12. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01019.x. Epub 2010 
Dec 16.

Diet and gender influences on processing and discrimination of speech sounds in 
3- and 6-month-old infants: a developmental ERP study.

Pivik RT(1), Andres A, Badger TM.

Author information:
(1)Arkansas Children's Nutrition Center, USA. pivikterry@uams.edu

Early post-natal nutrition influences later development, but there are no 
studies comparing brain function in healthy infants as a function of dietary 
intake even though the major infant diets differ significantly in nutrient 
composition. We studied brain responses (event-related potentials; ERPs) to 
speech sounds for infants who were fed either breast milk (BF), milk-based 
formula (MF), or soy formula (SF) during the first 6 months of life. Two 
syllables presented in an oddball paradigm elicited a late positive wave (P350) 
from temporal and frontal brain regions involved in language processes. All 
groups showed significantly greater response amplitudes to the infrequent 
syllable across sites at 3 months and frontally at 6 months, but significant 
discrimination at temporal sites was only observed at 6 months in BF infants. 
Decreases in response amplitudes from 3 to 6 months were greater for the 
frequently presented syllable, most prominent in BF infants, and greater in 
females than males. The results indicate greater syllable discrimination in BF 
than formula-fed infants, but whether this can be attributed to dietary 
influences alone remains unclear. Feeding method and background factor 
differences between breastfed and formula-fed infants may also contribute to the 
observed differences. The general absence of differences between formula-fed 
groups is notable and suggests that milk-based formula and soy formula equally 
support brain development and function during the first post-natal 6 months. 
Finally, the results indicate gender differences in the development of neural 
and temporal processes involved in sensory discrimination, and suggest that at 6 
months these processes are better developed in females.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01019.x
PMID: 21676091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


935. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):673-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01011.x. Epub 2010 
Dec 5.

Only self-generated actions create sensori-motor systems in the developing 
brain.

James KH(1), Swain SN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, USA. 
khjames@indiana.edu

Previous research shows that sensory and motor systems interact during 
perception, but how these connections among systems are created during 
development is unknown. The current work exposes young children to novel 'verbs' 
and objects through either (a) actively exploring the objects or (b) by seeing 
an experimenter interact with the objects. Results demonstrate that the motor 
system is recruited during auditory perception only after learning involved 
self-generated interactions with objects. Action observation itself led to 
above-baseline activation in one motor region during visual perception, but was 
still significantly less active than after self-generated action. Therefore, in 
the developing brain, associations are built upon real-world interactions of 
body and environment, leading to sensori-motor representations of both objects 
and words.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01011.x
PMCID: PMC4176697
PMID: 21676088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


936. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):660-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01010.x. Epub 2010 
Dec 5.

Effects of joint attention on long-term memory in 9-month-old infants: an 
event-related potentials study.

Kopp F(1), Lindenberger U.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany. 
kopp@mpib-berlin.mpg.de

Joint attention develops during the first year of life but little is known about 
its effects on long-term memory. We investigated whether joint attention 
modulates long-term memory in 9-month-old infants. Infants were familiarized 
with visually presented objects in either of two conditions that differed in the 
degree of joint attention (high versus low). EEG indicators in response to old 
and novel objects were probed directly after the familiarization phase 
(immediate recognition), and following a 1-week delay (delayed recognition). In 
immediate recognition, the amplitude of positive slow-wave activity was 
modulated by joint attention. In the delayed recognition, the amplitude of the 
Pb component differentiated between high and low joint attention. In addition, 
the positive slow-wave amplitude during immediate and delayed recognition 
correlated with the frequency of infants' looks to the experimenter during 
familiarization. Under both high- and low-joint-attention conditions, the 
processing of unfamiliar objects was associated with an enhanced Nc component. 
Our results show that the degree of joint attention modulates EEG during 
immediate and delayed recognition. We conclude that joint attention affects 
long-term memory processing in 9-month-old infants by enhancing the relevance of 
attended items.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01010.x
PMID: 21676087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


937. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):319-26. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00977.x.

Observant, nonaggressive temperament predicts theory of mind development.

Wellman HM(1), Lane JD, LaBounty J, Olson SL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0406, 
USA. hmw@umich.edu

Temperament dimensions influence children's approach to and participation in 
social interactive experiences which reflect and impact children's social 
understandings. Therefore, temperament differences might substantially impact 
theory of mind development in early childhood. Using longitudinal data, we 
report that certain early temperament characteristics (at age 3)--lack of 
aggressiveness, a shy-withdrawn stance to social interaction, and 
social-perceptual sensitivity--predict children's more advanced theory-of-mind 
understanding two years later. The findings contribute to our understanding of 
how theory of mind develops in the formative preschool period; they may also 
inform debates as to the evolutionary origins of theory of mind.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00977.x
PMCID: PMC3074529
PMID: 21499499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


938. Dev Sci. 2011 May;14(3):516-29. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00999.x. Epub 2010 
Nov 11.

A computational account of children's analogical reasoning: balancing inhibitory 
control in working memory and relational representation.

Morrison RG(1), Doumas LA, Richland LE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, IL 60660, USA. 
rmorrison@luc.edu

Theories accounting for the development of analogical reasoning tend to 
emphasize either the centrality of relational knowledge accretion or changes in 
information processing capability. Simulations in LISA (Hummel & Holyoak, 1997, 
2003), a neurally inspired computer model of analogical reasoning, allow us to 
explore how these factors may collaboratively contribute to the development of 
analogy in young children. Simulations explain systematic variations in United 
States and Hong Kong children's performance on analogies between familiar scenes 
(Richland, Morrison & Holyoak, 2006; Richland, Chang, Morrison & Au, 2010). 
Specifically, changes in inhibition levels in the model's working-memory system 
explain the developmental progression in US children's ability to handle 
increases in relational complexity and distraction from object similarity during 
analogical reasoning. In contrast, changes in how relations are represented in 
the model best capture cross-cultural differences in performance between 
children of the same ages (3-4 years) in the United States and Hong Kong. We use 
these results and simulations to argue that the development of analogical 
reasoning in children may best be conceptualized as an equilibrium between 
knowledge accretion and the maturation of information processing capability.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00999.x
PMID: 21477191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


939. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):190-204. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00971.x.

Elevated amygdala response to faces following early deprivation.

Tottenham N(1), Hare TA, Millner A, Gilhooly T, Zevin JD, Casey BJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1563, USA. 
nlt2002@med.cornell.edu

A functional neuroimaging study examined the long-term neural correlates of 
early adverse rearing conditions in humans as they relate to socio-emotional 
development. Previously institutionalized (PI) children and a same-aged 
comparison group were scanned using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) 
while performing an Emotional Face Go/Nogo task. PI children showed heightened 
activity of the amygdala, a region that supports emotional learning and 
reactivity to emotional stimuli, and corresponding decreases in cortical regions 
that support perceptual and cognitive functions. Amygdala activity was 
associated with decreased eye-contact as measured by eye-tracking methods and 
during a live dyadic interaction. The association between early rearing 
environment and subsequent eye-contact was mediated by amygdala activity. These 
data support the hypothesis that early adversity alters human brain development 
in a way that can persist into childhood, and they offer insight into the 
socio-emotional disturbances in human behavior following early adversity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00971.x
PMCID: PMC3050520
PMID: 21399712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


940. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):227-41. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00963.x.

Progressive and regressive developmental changes in neural substrates for face 
processing: testing specific predictions of the Interactive Specialization 
account.

Joseph JE(1), Gathers AD, Bhatt RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Kentucky, Chandler 
Medical Center, Lexington, KY 40536-0098, USA. jjoseph@email.uky.edu

Face processing undergoes a fairly protracted developmental time course but the 
neural underpinnings are not well understood. Prior fMRI studies have only 
examined progressive changes (i.e., increases in specialization in certain 
regions with age), which would be predicted by both the Interactive 
Specialization (IS) and maturational theories of neural development. To 
differentiate between these accounts, the present study also examined regressive 
changes (i.e., decreases in specialization in certain regions with age), which 
is predicted by the IS but not maturational account. The fMRI results show that 
both progressive and regressive changes occur, consistent with IS. Progressive 
changes mostly occurred in occipital-fusiform and inferior frontal cortex 
whereas regressive changes largely emerged in parietal and lateral temporal 
cortices. Moreover, inconsistent with the maturational account, all of the 
regions involved in face viewing in adults were active in children, with some 
regions already specialized for face processing by 5 years of age and other 
regions activated in children but not specifically for faces. Thus, 
neurodevelopment of face processing involves dynamic interactions among brain 
regions including age-related increases and decreases in specialization and the 
involvement of different regions at different ages. These results are more 
consistent with IS than maturational models of neural development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00963.x
PMCID: PMC3050484
PMID: 21399706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


941. Dev Sci. 2011 Jan;14(1):136-47. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00964.x.

Visual recognition memory across contexts.

Jones EJ(1), Pascalis O, Eacott MJ, Herbert JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Sheffield, UK.

In two experiments, we investigated the development of representational 
flexibility in visual recognition memory during infancy using the Visual Paired 
Comparison (VPC) task. In Experiment 1, 6- and 9-month-old infants exhibited 
recognition when familiarization and test occurred in the same room, but showed 
no evidence of recognition when familiarization and test occurred in different 
rooms. In contrast, 12- and 18-month-old infants exhibited recognition 
irrespective of testing room. Thus, flexibility across a change of room was 
observed at a younger age than flexibility across a change of background that 
has previously been seen with the VPC procedure (Robinson & Pascalis, 2004). To 
determine if limitations in representational flexibility across a change of 
background could be overcome by experiences during encoding, in Experiment 2, 
6-, 9-, 12- and 18-month-old infants were familiarized with a picture on 
multiple backgrounds. At all ages, infants showed recognition across a change in 
background at test. These findings indicate that dissociating an item from its 
context during encoding may be an important factor in understanding the 
representational flexibility of visual recognition memory in infancy. 
Developmental changes in representational flexibility are likely driven by 
changes in the functional maturity of the hippocampal formation, and experience.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00964.x
PMID: 21159095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


942. Dev Sci. 2011 Jan;14(1):83-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00959.x.

The structure of memory in infants and toddlers: an SEM study with full-terms 
and preterms.

Rose SA(1), Feldman JF, Jankowski JJ, Van Rossem R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kennedy Center, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Ave., Bronx, NY 10461, USA. 
susan.rose@einstein.yu.edu

There is considerable dispute about the nature of infant memory. Using SEM 
models, we examined whether popular characterizations of the structure of adult 
memory, including the two-process theory of recognition, are applicable in the 
infant and toddler years. The participants were a cohort of preterms and 
full-terms assessed longitudinally--at 1, 2, and 3 years--on a battery 
containing tasks of immediate and delayed recognition, recall, and memory span 
(a measure of short-term capacity). Results were in accord with adult models 
which assume that short- and long-term memory are distinct, and that two 
processes--familiarity and recollection--underlie recognition memory, while one 
alone--recollection--supports recall. The finding that prematurity, which 
entails risk of hippocampal compromise, affected recollection, but not 
familiarity, accords well with adult findings that hippocampal damage 
selectively affects recollection. These findings reveal striking similarity 
between the structure and theoretical underpinnings of infant and adult memory.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00959.x
PMID: 21159090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


943. Dev Sci. 2011 Jan;14(1):34-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00955.x.

Rise time and formant transition duration in the discrimination of speech 
sounds: the Ba-Wa distinction in developmental dyslexia.

Goswami U(1), Fosker T, Huss M, Mead N, Szucs D.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Neuroscience in Education, University of Cambridge, 184 Hills 
Road, Cambridge, UK. ucg10@cam.ac.uk

Across languages, children with developmental dyslexia have a specific 
difficulty with the neural representation of the sound structure (phonological 
structure) of speech. One likely cause of their difficulties with phonology is a 
perceptual difficulty in auditory temporal processing (Tallal, 1980). Tallal 
(1980) proposed that basic auditory processing of brief, rapidly successive 
acoustic changes is compromised in dyslexia, thereby affecting phonetic 
discrimination (e.g. discriminating /b/ from /d/) via impaired discrimination of 
formant transitions (rapid acoustic changes in frequency and intensity). 
However, an alternative auditory temporal hypothesis is that the basic auditory 
processing of the slower amplitude modulation cues in speech is compromised 
(Goswami et al., 2002). Here, we contrast children's perception of a synthetic 
speech contrast (ba/wa) when it is based on the speed of the rate of change of 
frequency information (formant transition duration) versus the speed of the rate 
of change of amplitude modulation (rise time). We show that children with 
dyslexia have excellent phonetic discrimination based on formant transition 
duration, but poor phonetic discrimination based on envelope cues. The results 
explain why phonetic discrimination may be allophonic in developmental dyslexia 
(Serniclaes et al., 2004), and suggest new avenues for the remediation of 
developmental dyslexia.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00955.x
PMID: 21159086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


944. Dev Sci. 2011 Jan;14(1):1-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00949.x.

Children's beliefs about the fantasy/reality status of hypothesized machines.

Cook C(1), Sobel DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. ccook@mit.edu

Four-year-olds, 6-year-olds, and adults were asked to make judgments about the 
reality status of four different types of machines: real machines that children 
and adults interact with on a daily basis, real machines that children and 
adults interact with rarely (if at all), and impossible machines that violated a 
real-world physical or biological causal law. Adults generally categorized all 
of the machines accurately. Both groups of children categorized familiar 
possible machines as real, but were agnostic as to the fantasy status of 
unfamiliar possible machines. Children generally responded that both kinds of 
impossible machines were make-believe, but 4-year-olds were more likely to make 
these accurate judgments for the physical than biological items, different from 
the older children and adults (whose responses were similar). These data suggest 
that children's judgments about the possibility of machines are not strictly 
limited by first-hand experience. Young children's domain-specific causal 
knowledge interacts with their understanding of the fantasy/reality distinction 
to constrain their inferences in a rational way.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00949.x
PMID: 21159082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


945. Dev Sci. 2010 Nov;13(6):923-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00951.x.

Three-month-olds show a negativity bias in their social evaluations.

Hamlin JK(1), Wynn K, Bloom P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA. 
kiley.hamlin@yale.edu

Previous research has shown that 6-month-olds evaluate others on the basis of 
their social behaviors--they are attracted to prosocial individuals, and avoid 
antisocial individuals (Hamlin, Wynn & Bloom, 2007). The current studies 
investigate these capacities prior to 6 months of age. Results from two 
experiments indicate that even 3-month-old infants evaluate others based on 
their social behavior towards third parties, and that negative social 
information is developmentally privileged.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00951.x
PMCID: PMC2966030
PMID: 20977563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


946. Dev Sci. 2010 Nov;13(6):900-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00948.x.

Stable individual differences in number discrimination in infancy.

Libertus ME(1), Brannon EM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA. 
melissa.libertus@duke.edu

Previous studies have shown that as a group 6-month-old infants successfully 
discriminate numerical changes when the values differ by at least a 1:2 ratio 
but fail at a 2:3 ratio (e.g. 8 vs. 16 but not 8 vs. 12). However, no studies 
have yet examined individual differences in number discrimination in infancy. 
Using a novel numerical change detection paradigm, we present more direct 
evidence that infants' numerical perception is ratio-dependent even within the 
range of discriminable ratios and thus adheres to Weber's Law. Furthermore, we 
show that infants' numerical discrimination at 6 months reliably predicts their 
numerical discrimination abilities but not visual short-term memory at 9 months. 
Thus, individual differences in numerical discrimination acuity may be stable 
within the first year of life and provide important avenues for future 
longitudinal research exploring the relationship between infant numerical 
discrimination and later developing math achievement.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00948.x
PMCID: PMC2966022
PMID: 20977560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


947. Dev Sci. 2010 Nov;13(6):886-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00940.x.

Neurodevelopmental changes in the circuits underlying empathy and sympathy from 
childhood to adulthood.

Decety J(1), Michalska KJ.

Author information:
(1)Center for Cognitive and Social Neuroscience, Department of Psychology and 
Psychiatry, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. decety@uchicago.edu

Empathy and sympathy play crucial roles in much of human social interaction and 
are necessary components for healthy coexistence. Sympathy is thought to be a 
proxy for motivating prosocial behavior and providing the affective and 
motivational base for moral development. The purpose of the present study was to 
use functional MRI to characterize developmental changes in brain activation in 
the neural circuits underpinning empathy and sympathy. Fifty-seven individuals, 
whose age ranged from 7 to 40 years old, were presented with short animated 
visual stimuli depicting painful and non-painful situations. These situations 
involved either a person whose pain was accidentally caused or a person whose 
pain was intentionally inflicted by another individual to elicit empathic 
(feeling as the other) or sympathetic (feeling concern for the other) emotions, 
respectively. Results demonstrate monotonic age-related changes in the amygdala, 
supplementary motor area, and posterior insula when participants were exposed to 
painful situations that were accidentally caused. When participants observed 
painful situations intentionally inflicted by another individual, age-related 
changes were detected in the dorsolateral prefrontal and ventromedial prefrontal 
cortex, with a gradual shift in that latter region from its medial to its 
lateral portion. This pattern of activation reflects a change from a visceral 
emotional response critical for the analysis of the affective significance of 
stimuli to a more evaluative function. Further, these data provide evidence for 
partially distinct neural mechanisms subserving empathy and sympathy, and 
demonstrate the usefulness of a developmental neurobiological approach to the 
new emerging area of moral neuroscience.

© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00940.x
PMID: 20977559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


948. Dev Sci. 2010 Nov;13(6):876-85. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00938.x.

Mapping numerical processing, reading, and executive functions in the developing 
brain: an fMRI meta-analysis of 52 studies including 842 children.

Houdé O(1), Rossi S, Lubin A, Joliot M.

Author information:
(1)CI-NAPS, UMR 6232, CNRS, CEA, Caen and Paris Descartes Universities, Caen, 
France. olivier.houde@paris5.sorbonne.fr

Tracing the connections from brain functions to children's cognitive development 
and education is a major goal of modern neuroscience. We performed the first 
meta-analysis of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data obtained over 
the past decade (1999-2008) on more than 800 children and adolescents in three 
core systems of cognitive development and school learning: numerical abilities, 
reading, and executive functions (i.e. cognitive control). We ran Activation 
Likelihood Estimation (ALE) meta-analyses to obtain regions of reliable activity 
across all the studies. The results indicate that, unlike results usually 
reported for adults, children primarily engage the frontal cortex when solving 
numerical tasks. With age, there may be a shift from reliance on the frontal 
cortex to reliance on the parietal cortex. In contrast, the frontal, 
temporo-parietal and occipito-temporal regions at work during reading in 
children are very similar to those reported in adults. The executive frontal 
regions are also consistent with the imaging literature on cognitive control in 
adults, but the developmental comparison between children and adolescents 
demonstrates a key role of the anterior insular cortex (AIC) with an additional 
right AIC involvement in adolescents.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00938.x
PMID: 20977558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


949. Dev Sci. 2010 Nov;13(6):839-48. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00945.x.

The development of joint visual attention: a longitudinal study of gaze 
following during interactions with mothers and strangers.

Gredebäck G(1), Fikke L, Melinder A.

Author information:
(1)The Cognitive Developmental Research Unit (EKUP), Department of Psychology, 
University of Oslo, Norway. gustaf.gredeback@psykologi.uio.no

Two- to 8-month-old infants interacted with their mother or a stranger in a 
prospective longitudinal gaze following study. Gaze following, as assessed by 
eye tracking, emerged between 2 and 4 months and stabilized between 6 and 8 
months of age. Overall, infants followed the gaze of a stranger more than they 
followed the gaze of their mothers, demonstrating a stranger preference that 
emerged between 4 and 6 months of age. These findings do not support the notion 
that infants acquire gaze following through reinforcement learning. Instead, the 
findings are discussed with respect to the social cognitive framework, 
suggesting that young infants are driven by social cognitive motives in their 
interactions with others.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00945.x
PMID: 20977555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


950. Dev Sci. 2010 Nov;13(6):826-38. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00939.x.

Development of motion processing in children with autism.

Annaz D(1), Remington A, Milne E, Coleman M, Campbell R, Thomas MS, Swettenham 
J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Sciences, Division of Psychology and Language 
Science, University College London, UK. d.annaz@psychology.bbk.ac.uk

Recent findings suggest that children with autism may be impaired in the 
perception of biological motion from moving point-light displays. Some children 
with autism also have abnormally high motion coherence thresholds. In the 
current study we tested a group of children with autism and a group of typically 
developing children aged 5 to 12 years of age on several motion perception 
tasks, in order to establish the specificity of the biological motion deficit in 
relation to other visual discrimination skills. The first task required the 
recognition of biological from scrambled motion. Three quasi-psychophysical 
tasks then established individual thresholds for the detection of biological 
motion in dynamic noise, of motion coherence and of form-from-motion. Lastly, 
individual thresholds for a task of static perception--contour integration 
(Gabor displays)--were also obtained. Compared to controls, children with autism 
were particularly impaired in processing biological motion in relation to any 
developmental measure (chronological or mental age). In contrast, there was some 
developmental overlap in ability to process other types of visual motion between 
typically developing children and the children with autism, and evidence of 
developmental change in both groups. Finally, Gabor display thresholds appeared 
to develop typically in children with autism.

© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00939.x
PMID: 20977554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


951. Dev Sci. 2010 Nov;13(6):813-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00944.x.

The development of emotional face and eye gaze processing.

Hoehl S(1), Striano T.

Author information:
(1)Department for Psychology, University of Heidelberg, Germany. 
Stefanie.hoehl@psychologie.uni-heidelberg.de

Recent research has demonstrated that infants' attention towards novel objects 
is affected by an adult's emotional expression and eye gaze toward the object. 
The current event-related potential (ERP) study investigated how infants at 3, 
6, and 9 months of age process fearful compared to neutral faces looking toward 
objects or averting gaze away from objects. Furthermore, we examined how the 
processing of novel objects is affected by gaze direction and emotional 
expression. We hypothesized that an adult's fearful expression should be 
particularly salient when it is directed toward a referent in the environment. 
Furthermore, responses to objects should be increased if the face previously 
expressed fear toward the object. Three-month-olds did not show differential 
neural responses to fearful vs. neutral faces regardless of gaze direction. 
Six-month-olds showed an enhanced negative central (Nc) component for fearful 
relative to neutral faces looking toward objects, but not when eye gaze was 
averted away from the objects. Furthermore, 6-month-olds showed an enhanced Nc 
for objects that had been gaze-cued by a fearful compared to a neutral face. 
Nine-month-olds showed an enhanced Nc for fearful relative to neutral faces in 
both eye gaze conditions and showed an enhanced Nc for objects that had been 
gaze-cued by a neutral face. The findings are discussed in the context of social 
cognitive and brain development.

© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00944.x
PMID: 20977553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


952. Dev Sci. 2010 Nov;13(6):F15-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01014.x.

Development of relational reasoning during adolescence.

Dumontheil I(1), Houlton R, Christoff K, Blakemore SJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, UK. 
i.dumontheil@gmail.com

Non-linear changes in behaviour and in brain activity during adolescent 
development have been reported in a variety of cognitive tasks. These 
developmental changes are often interpreted as being a consequence of changes in 
brain structure, including non-linear changes in grey matter volumes, which 
occur during adolescence. However, very few studies have attempted to combine 
behavioural, functional and structural data. This multi-method approach is the 
one we took in the current study, which was designed to investigate 
developmental changes in behaviour and brain activity during relational 
reasoning, the simultaneous integration of multiple relations. We used a 
relational reasoning task known to recruit rostrolateral prefrontal cortex 
(RLPFC), a region that undergoes substantial structural changes during 
adolescence. The task was administered to female participants in a behavioural 
(N = 178, 7-27 years) and an fMRI study (N = 37, 11-30 years). Non-linear 
changes in accuracy were observed, with poorer performance during 
mid-adolescence. fMRI and VBM results revealed a complex picture of linear and 
possibly non-linear changes with age. Performance and structural changes partly 
accounted for changes with age in RLPFC and medial superior frontal gyrus 
activity but not for a decrease in activation in the anterior insula/frontal 
operculum between mid-adolescence and adulthood. These functional changes might 
instead reflect the maturation of neurocognitive strategies.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01014.x
PMID: 20977551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


953. Dev Sci. 2010 Sep 1;13(5):692-705. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00925.x.

Ophthalmological, cognitive, electrophysiological and MRI assessment of visual 
processing in preterm children without major neuromotor impairment.

O'Reilly M(1), Vollmer B, Vargha-Khadem F, Neville B, Connelly A, Wyatt J, Timms 
C, de Haan M.

Author information:
(1)Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, 
London, UK. m.oreilly@ich.ucl.ac.uk

Many studies report chronic deficits in visual processing in children born 
preterm. We investigated whether functional abnormalities in visual processing 
exist in children born preterm but without major neuromotor impairment (i.e. 
cerebral palsy). Twelve such children (< 33 weeks gestation or birthweight < 
1000 g) without major neuromotor impairment and 12 born full-term controls were 
assessed at 8-12 years of age by means of ophthalmological assessment (visual 
acuity, colour vision, stereopsis, stereoacuity, visual fields, ocular motility, 
motor fusion), cognitive tests of visual-motor, visual-perceptual and 
visual-spatial skills and pattern-reversal visual evoked potentials (PR-VEPs). 
All participants also underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain 
and neuromotor assessments. No significant differences were found between the 
groups on the ophthalmological, visual cognitive, neurological, neuromotor or 
MRI measures. The P100 component of the PR-VEP showed a significantly shorter 
latency in the preterm compared with the full-term participants. Whilst this 
P100 finding suggests that subtle abnormalities may exist at the 
neurophysiological level, we conclude that visual dysfunction is not 
systematically associated with preterm birth in the context of normal 
neurological status.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00925.x
PMID: 20712735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


954. Dev Sci. 2010 Jul;13(4):F1-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00982.x.

Essentialism in the absence of language? Evidence from rhesus monkeys (Macaca 
mulatta).

Phillips W(1), Shankar M, Santos LR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, USA.

We explored whether rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) share one important feature 
of human essentialist reasoning: the capacity to track category membership 
across radical featural transformations. Specifically, we examined whether 
monkeys--like children (Keil, 1989)--expect a transformed object to have the 
internal properties of its original category. In two experiments, monkeys 
watched as an experimenter visually transformed a familiar fruit (e.g. apple) 
into a new kind of fruit (e.g. coconut) either by placing a fruit exterior over 
the original, or by removing an exterior shell and revealing the inside kind of 
fruit. The experimenter then pretended to place an inside piece of the 
transformed fruit into a box which the monkey was allowed to search. Results 
indicated that monkeys searched the box longer when they found a piece of fruit 
inconsistent with the inside kind, suggesting that the monkeys expected that the 
inside of the transformed fruit would taste like the innermost kind they saw. 
These results suggest that monkeys may share at least one aspect of 
psychological essentialism: they maintain category-specific expectations about 
an object's internal properties even when that object's external properties 
change. These results therefore suggest that some essentialist expectations may 
emerge in the absence of language, and thus raise the possibility that such 
tendencies may emerge earlier in human development than has previously been 
considered.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00982.x
PMCID: PMC4677677
PMID: 20590717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


955. Dev Sci. 2010 May;13(3):545-551. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00912.x.

Effects of Kindermusik training on infants' rhythmic enculturation.

Gerry DW(1), Faux AL(1), Trainor LJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Neuroscience & Behaviour, McMaster University, 
Canada.

Phillips-Silver and Trainor (2005) demonstrated a link between movement and the 
metrical interpretation of rhythm patterns in 7-month-old infants. Infants 
bounced on every second beat of a rhythmic pattern with no auditory accents 
later preferred to listen to an accented version of the pattern with accents 
every second beat (duple or march meter), whereas infants bounced on every third 
beat of the same rhythmic pattern preferred to listen to a version with accents 
every third beat (triple or waltz meter). The present study compared infants 
participating in Kindermusik classes with infants not participating in music 
classes. In Kindermusik classes infants receive enriched experience moving to 
music. Following Western musical norms, the majority of the music samples in the 
classes are in duple meter. During the preference test, Kindermusik infants 
listened longer overall, indicating heightened interest in musical rhythms. Both 
groups listened longer to the accented version that matched how they had been 
bounced, but only the Kindermusik group showed a stronger preference in the case 
of duple bouncing than in the case of triple bouncing. We conclude that musical 
classes for infants can accelerate the development of culture-specific metrical 
perception.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00912.x
PMID: 20443974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


956. Dev Sci. 2010 May;13(3):441-453. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00907.x.

Choice latency as a cue for children's subjective confidence in the correctness 
of their answers.

Koriat A(1), Ackerman R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.

Research with adults indicates that confidence in the correctness of an answer 
decreases as a function of the amount of time it takes to reach that answer, 
suggesting that people use response latency as a mnemonic cue for subjective 
confidence. Experiment 1 extended investigation to 2nd, 3rd and 5th graders. 
When children chose the answer to general knowledge questions, their confidence 
in the answer was inversely related to choice latency. However, the strength of 
the relationship increased with grade, suggesting increased reliance with age on 
the feedback from task performance. The validity of latency as a cue for the 
accuracy of the answer also increased with age, possibly contributing to the 
observed age increase in the extent to which confidence judgment discriminated 
between correct and wrong answers. Whereas these results illustrate the 
dependence of metacognitive monitoring on the feedback from control operations, 
Experiments 2 and 3 examined the idea that control-based monitoring affects 
subsequent control operations. When children were free to choose which answers 
to volunteer under a payoff schedule that emphasized accuracy, they tended to 
volunteer high-confidence answers more than low-confidence answers (Experiment 
2) and more short-latency answers than long-latency answers (Experiment 3). The 
latter tendency was again stronger for older than for younger children. The 
results are discussed in terms of the intricate relationships between monitoring 
and control processes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00907.x
PMID: 20443965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


957. Dev Sci. 2010 May;13(3):421-429. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00896.x.

Children's attention to sample composition in learning, teaching and discovery.

Rhodes M(1), Gelman SA(1), Brickman D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA.

Two studies compared children's attention to sample composition - whether a 
sample provides a diverse representation of a category of interest - during 
teacher-led and learner-driven learning contexts. In Study 1 (n = 48), 
5-year-olds attended to sample composition to make inferences about biological 
properties only when samples were presented by a knowledgeable teacher. In 
contrast, adults attended to sample composition in both teacher-led and 
learner-driven contexts. In Study 2 (n = 51), 6-year-olds chose to create 
diverse samples to teach information about biological kinds to another child, 
but not to discover new information for themselves, whereas adults chose to 
create diverse samples for both teaching and information discovery. Results 
suggest that how children approach the interpretation and selection of evidence 
varies depending on whether learning occurs in a pedagogical or a 
non-pedagogical context.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00896.x
PMCID: PMC3419268
PMID: 20443963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


958. Dev Sci. 2010 May;13(3):407-420. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00898.x.

The interaction between acoustic salience and language experience in 
developmental speech perception: evidence from nasal place discrimination.

Narayan CR(1), Werker JF(1), Beddor PS(1).

Author information:
(1) Department of Humanities, University of Toronto Scarborough and Graduate 
Faculty of Linguistics, University of Toronto, Canada Infant Studies Centre, 
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Canada Department of 
Linguistics, University of Michigan, USA.

Previous research suggests that infant speech perception reorganizes in the 
first year: young infants discriminate both native and non-native phonetic 
contrasts, but by 10-12 months difficult non-native contrasts are less 
discriminable whereas performance improves on native contrasts. In the current 
study, four experiments tested the hypothesis that, in addition to the influence 
of native language experience, acoustic salience also affects the perceptual 
reorganization that takes place in infancy. Using a visual habituation paradigm, 
two nasal place distinctions that differ in relative acoustic salience, 
acoustically robust labial-alveolar [ma]-[na] and acoustically less salient 
alveolar-velar [na]-[ enga], were presented to infants in a cross-language 
design. English-learning infants at 6-8 and 10-12 months showed discrimination 
of the native and acoustically robust [ma]-[na] (Experiment 1), but not the 
non-native (in initial position) and acoustically less salient [na]-[ enga] 
(Experiment 2). Very young (4-5-month-old) English-learning infants tested on 
the same native and non-native contrasts also showed discrimination of only the 
[ma]-[na] distinction (Experiment 3). Filipino-learning infants, whose ambient 
language includes the syllable-initial alveolar (/n/)-velar (/ eng/) contrast, 
showed discrimination of native [na]-[ enga] at 10-12 months, but not at 6-8 
months (Experiment 4). These results support the hypothesis that acoustic 
salience affects speech perception in infancy, with native language experience 
facilitating discrimination of an acoustically similar phonetic distinction 
[na]-[ enga]. We discuss the implications of this developmental profile for a 
comprehensive theory of speech perception in infancy.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00898.x
PMID: 20443962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


959. Dev Sci. 2010 Mar;13(2):385-406. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00895.x.

The neural basis of speech parsing in children and adults.

McNealy K(1), Mazziotta JC, Dapretto M.

Author information:
(1)Ahmanson-Lovelace Brain Mapping Center, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and 
Human Behaviour, University of California, Los Angeles, USA.

Word segmentation, detecting word boundaries in continuous speech, is a 
fundamental aspect of language learning that can occur solely by the computation 
of statistical and speech cues. Fifty-four children underwent functional 
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while listening to three streams of 
concatenated syllables that contained either high statistical regularities, high 
statistical regularities and speech cues, or no easily detectable cues. 
Significant signal increases over time in temporal cortices suggest that 
children utilized the cues to implicitly segment the speech streams. This was 
confirmed by the findings of a second fMRI run, in which children displayed 
reliably greater activity in the left inferior frontal gyrus when listening to 
'words' that had occurred more frequently in the streams of speech they had just 
heard. Finally, comparisons between activity observed in these children and that 
in previously studied adults indicate significant developmental changes in the 
neural substrate of speech parsing.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00895.x
PMCID: PMC3229831
PMID: 20136936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


960. Dev Sci. 2010 Mar;13(2):370-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00905.x.

The emergence of a novel representation from action: evidence from preschoolers.

Boncoddo R(1), Dixon JA, Kelley E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, USA.

Recent work in embodied cognition has proposed that representations and actions 
are inextricably linked. The current study examines a developmental account of 
this relationship. Specifically, we propose that children's actions are 
foundational for novel representations. Thirty-two preschoolers, aged 3.4 to 5.7 
years, were asked to solve a set of simple gear-system problems. Participants' 
motions and verbalizations were coded to establish the strategies they used. The 
preschoolers initially solved the problems by simulating the turning and pushing 
of the gears. Subsequently, most participants discovered a new representation of 
the problems: the turning direction of the gears alternates. Results show that 
the number of actions that embodied alternation information, during their 
simulation of the system, predicted the later emergence of the higher-order 
representation (i.e. that the gears alternate turning direction). Thus, it 
appears that the preschoolers discovered a new representation based on their own 
actions. These results are consistent with the developmental embodiment 
hypothesis: actions are central to the emergence of new representations.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00905.x
PMID: 20136934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


961. Dev Sci. 2010 Mar;13(2):279-88. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00883.x.

Sensori-motor experience leads to changes in visual processing in the developing 
brain.

James KH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 
Bloomington, USA. khjames@indiana.edu

Since Broca's studies on language processing, cortical functional specialization 
has been considered to be integral to efficient neural processing. A fundamental 
question in cognitive neuroscience concerns the type of learning that is 
required for functional specialization to develop. To address this issue with 
respect to the development of neural specialization for letters, we used 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to compare brain activation 
patterns in pre-school children before and after different letter-learning 
conditions: a sensori-motor group practised printing letters during the learning 
phase, while the control group practised visual recognition. Results 
demonstrated an overall left-hemisphere bias for processing letters in these 
pre-literate participants, but, more interestingly, showed enhanced blood 
oxygen-level-dependent activation in the visual association cortex during letter 
perception only after sensori-motor (printing) learning. It is concluded that 
sensori-motor experience augments processing in the visual system of pre-school 
children. The change of activation in these neural circuits provides important 
evidence that 'learning-by-doing' can lay the foundation for, and potentially 
strengthen, the neural systems used for visual letter recognition.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00883.x
PMCID: PMC4176698
PMID: 20136924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


962. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):229-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00891.x.

The first steps in word learning are easier when the shoes fit: comparing 
monolingual and bilingual infants.

Mattock K(1), Polka L, Rvachew S, Krehm M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Lancaster University, Fylde College, Bailrigg, 
Lancaster LA1 4YW, UK. k.mattock@lancaster.ac.uk

English, French, and bilingual English-French 17-month-old infants were compared 
for their performance on a word learning task using the Switch task. Object 
names presented a /b/ vs. /g/ contrast that is phonemic in both English and 
French, and auditory strings comprised English and French pronunciations by an 
adult bilingual. Infants were habituated to two novel objects labeled 'bowce' or 
'gowce' and were then presented with a switch trial where a familiar word and 
familiar object were paired in a novel combination, and a same trial with a 
familiar word-object pairing. Bilingual infants looked significantly longer to 
switch vs. same trials, but English and French monolinguals did not, suggesting 
that bilingual infants can learn word-object associations when the phonetic 
conditions favor their input. Monolingual infants likely failed because the 
bilingual mode of presentation increased phonetic variability and did not match 
their real-world input. Experiment 2 tested this hypothesis by presenting 
monolingual infants with nonce word tokens restricted to native language 
pronunciations. Monolinguals succeeded in this case. Experiment 3 revealed that 
the presence of unfamiliar pronunciations in Experiment 2, rather than a 
reduction in overall phonetic variability was the key factor to success, as 
French infants failed when tested with English pronunciations of the nonce 
words. Thus phonetic variability impacts how infants perform in the switch task 
in ways that contribute to differences in monolingual and bilingual performance. 
Moreover, both monolinguals and bilinguals are developing adaptive speech 
processing skills that are specific to the language(s) they are learning.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00891.x
PMID: 20121879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


963. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):170-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00870.x.

The role of landmarks and boundaries in the development of spatial memory.

Bullens J(1), Nardini M, Doeller CF, Braddick O, Postma A, Burgess N.

Author information:
(1)Helmholtz Research Institute, Department of Experimental Psychology, Utrecht 
University, Heidelberglaan 2, 3584 CS Utrecht, The Netherlands. J.Bullens@uu.nl

It has been suggested that learning an object's location relative to (1) 
intramaze landmarks and (2) local boundaries is supported by parallel striatal 
and hippocampal systems, both of which rely upon input from a third system for 
orientation. However, little is known about the developmental trajectories of 
these systems' contributions to spatial learning. The present study tested 5- 
and 7-year-old children and adults on a water maze-like task in which all three 
types of cue were available. Participants had to remember the location of an 
object hidden in a circular bounded environment containing a moveable intramaze 
landmark and surrounded by distal cues. Children performed less accurately than 
adults, and showed a different pattern of error. While adults relied most on the 
stable cue provided by the boundary, children relied on both landmark and 
boundary cues similarly, suggesting a developmental increase in the weighting 
given to boundary cues. Further, adults were most accurate in coding angular 
information (dependent on distal cues), whereas children were most accurate in 
coding distance, suggesting a developing ability to use distal cues to orient. 
These results indicate that children as young as 5 years use boundary, intramaze 
landmark, and distal visual cues in parallel, but that the basic accuracy and 
relative weighting of these cues changes during subsequent development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00870.x
PMID: 20121873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


964. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):77-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00849.x.

Brainstem correlates of temporal auditory processing in children with specific 
language impairment.

Basu M(1), Krishnan A, Weber-Fox C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Concordia University, Canada.

Deficits in identification and discrimination of sounds with short 
inter-stimulus intervals or short formant transitions in children with specific 
language impairment (SLI) have been taken to reflect an underlying temporal 
auditory processing deficit. Using the sustained frequency following response 
(FFR) and the onset auditory brainstem responses (ABR) we evaluated if children 
with SLI show abnormalities at the brainstem level consistent with a temporal 
processing deficit. To this end, the neural encoding of tonal sweeps, as 
reflected in the FFR, for different rates of frequency change, and the effects 
of reducing inter-stimulus interval on the ABR components were evaluated in 10 
4-11-year-old SLI children and their age-matched controls. Results for the SLI 
group showed degraded FFR phase-locked neural activity that failed to faithfully 
track the frequency change presented in the tonal sweeps, particularly at the 
faster sweep rates. SLI children also showed longer latencies for waves III and 
V of the ABR and a greater prolongation of wave III at high stimulus rates 
(>30/sec), suggesting greater susceptibility to neural adaptation. These results 
taken together appear to suggest a disruption in the temporal pattern of 
phase-locked neural activity necessary to encode rapid frequency change and an 
increased susceptibility to desynchronizing factors related to faster rates of 
stimulus presentation in children with SLI.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00849.x
PMID: 20121865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


965. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):1041-53. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00843.x.

Genetic architecture of verbal abilities in children and adolescents.

Hoekstra RA(1), Bartels M, van Leeuwen M, Boomsma DI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Psychology, VU University Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. R.A.Hoekstra@open.ac.uk

The etiology of individual differences in general verbal ability, verbal 
learning and letter and category fluency were examined in two independent 
samples of 9- and 18-year-old twin pairs and their siblings. In both age groups, 
we observed strong familial resemblance for general verbal ability and moderate 
familial resemblance for verbal learning, letter and category fluency. All 
familial resemblance was explained by genetic factors. There was significant 
covariance among the tests, which was stronger in magnitude in the adolescent 
cohort. The covariance was mainly explained by genetic effects shared by 
subtests, both in middle childhood and in late adolescence. In addition to a 
shared set of genes that influenced all phenotypes, there were also genetic 
influences specific to the different verbal phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00843.x
PMID: 19840058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


966. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):1026-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00841.x.

Age-related changes in the control of episodic retrieval: an ERP study of 
recognition memory in children and adults.

Czernochowski D(1), Mecklinger A, Johansson M.

Author information:
(1)Mathematical and Cognitive Psychology, Heinrich-Heine University, 
Duesseldorf, Germany. d.czernochowski@uni-duesseldorf.de

We examined developmental aspects of the ability to monitor the temporal context 
of an item's previous occurrence while event-related potentials (ERPs) were 
recorded. In a continuous recognition task, children between 10 and 12 years and 
young adults watched a stream of pictures repeated with a lag of 10-15 
intervening items and indicated recurrences. In a second run, these already 
familiar pictures were repeated as non-targets along with new pictures, while 
subjects were instructed to indicate only recurrences within the run. Young 
adults were able to maintain high performance levels in both tasks, whereas 
children had longer response times and committed a large number of false alarms 
to non-targets. ERPs in both age groups showed similar parietal old/new effects 
for target repetitions within runs. In addition, adults' ERPs showed similar 
old/new effects at frontal electrodes for repetitions and non-targets, 
presumably reflecting assessments of familiarity, whereas for children repeated 
relative to first presentations were associated with more negative-going 
waveforms at anterior frontal recording sites. Together, these results suggest a 
continuing maturation of the brain networks assessing novelty or familiarity. 
Recollection as indexed by parietal old/new effects appeared similar between 
young adults and children, but the development of controlled episodic retrieval, 
resulting in recollection of non-target information, appears to continue well 
into adolescence.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00841.x
PMID: 19840057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


967. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):1020-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00838.x.

Sequence learning in infancy: the independent contributions of conditional 
probability and pair frequency information.

Marcovitch S(1), Lewkowicz DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, 
Greensboro, NC 27402-6170, USA. s_marcov@uncg.edu

The ability to perceive sequences is fundamental to cognition. Previous studies 
have shown that infants can learn visual sequences as early as 2 months of age 
and it has been suggested that this ability is mediated by sensitivity to 
conditional probability information. Typically, conditional probability 
information has covaried with frequency information in these studies, raising 
the possibility that each type of information may have contributed independently 
to sequence learning. The current study explicitly investigated the independent 
contribution of each type of information. We habituated 2.5-, 4.5-, and 
8.5-month-old infants to a sequence of looming visual shapes whose ordering was 
defined independently by specific conditional probability relations among pair 
elements and by the frequency of occurrence of such pairs. During test trials, 
we tested infants' sensitivity to each type of information and found that both 
types of information independently influenced sequence learning by 4.5 months of 
age.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00838.x
PMCID: PMC2769011
PMID: 19840056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


968. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):1013-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00861.x.

Sensitivity to communicative relevance tells young children what to imitate.

Southgate V(1), Chevallier C, Csibra G.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, School of Psychology, Birkbeck, 
University of London, UK. v.southgate@bbk.ac.uk

How do children decide which elements of an action demonstration are important 
to reproduce in the context of an imitation game? We tested whether selective 
imitation of a demonstrator's actions may be based on the same search for 
relevance that drives adult interpretation of ostensive communication. Three 
groups of 18-month-old infants were shown a toy animal either hopping or sliding 
(action style) into a toy house (action outcome), but the communicative 
relevance of the action style differed depending on the group. For the no prior 
information group, all the information in the demonstration was new and so 
equally relevant. However, for infants in the ostensive prior information group, 
the potential action outcome was already communicated to the infant prior to the 
main demonstration, rendering the action style more relevant. Infants in the 
ostensive prior information group imitated the action style significantly more 
than infants in the no prior information group, suggesting that the relevance 
manipulation modulated their interpretation of the action demonstration. A 
further condition (non-ostensive prior information) confirmed that this 
sensitivity to new information is only present when the 'old' information had 
been communicated, and not when infants discovered this information for 
themselves. These results indicate that, like adults, human infants expect 
communication to contain relevant content, and imitate action elements that, 
relative to their current knowledge state or to the common ground with the 
demonstrator, is identified as most relevant.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00861.x
PMID: 19840055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


969. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):1007-12. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00837.x.

Nap-dependent learning in infants.

Hupbach A(1), Gomez RL, Bootzin RR, Nadel L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA. 
ahupbach@email.arizona.edu

Sleep has been shown to aid a variety of learning and memory processes in adults 
(Stickgold, 2005). Recently, we showed that infants' learning also benefits from 
subsequent sleep such that infants who nap are able to abstract the general 
grammatical pattern of a briefly presented artificial language (Gomez, Bootzin & 
Nadel, 2006). In the present study, we demonstrate, for the first time, 
long-term effects of sleep on memory for an artificial language. 
Fifteen-month-old infants who had napped within 4 hours of language exposure 
remembered the general grammatical pattern of the language 24 hours later. In 
contrast, infants who had not napped shortly after being familiarized with the 
language showed no evidence of remembering anything about the language. Our 
findings support the view that infants' frequent napping plays an essential role 
in establishing long-term memory.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00837.x
PMID: 19840054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


970. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):978-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00846.x.

How useful is executive control training? Age differences in near and far 
transfer of task-switching training.

Karbach J(1), Kray J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Saarland University, Campus A, Saarbrücken, 
Germany. j.karbach@mx.uni-saarland.de

Although executive functions can be improved by training, little is known about 
the extent to which these training-related benefits can be transferred to other 
tasks, or whether this transfer can be modulated by the type of training. This 
study investigated lifespan changes in near transfer of task-switching training 
to structurally similar tasks and its modulation by verbal self-instructions and 
variable training, as well as far transfer to structurally dissimilar 
'executive' tasks and fluid intelligence. Three age groups (8-10; 18-26; 62-76 
years of age) were examined in a pretest-training-posttest design. We found near 
transfer of task-switching training in all age groups, especially in children 
and older adults. Near transfer was enhanced in adults and impaired in children 
when training tasks were variable. We also found substantial far transfer to 
other executive tasks and fluid intelligence in all age groups, pointing to the 
transfer of relatively general executive control abilities after training.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00846.x
PMID: 19840052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


971. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):929-37. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00845.x.

Change of reference frame for tactile localization during child development.

Pagel B(1), Heed T, Röder B.

Author information:
(1)Biological Psychology and Neuropsychology, University of Hamburg, Germany.

Temporal order judgements (TOJ) for two tactile stimuli, one presented to the 
left and one to the right hand, are less precise when the hands are crossed over 
the midline than when the hands are uncrossed. This 'crossed hand' effect has 
been considered as evidence for a remapping of tactile input into an external 
reference frame. Since late, but not early, blind individuals show such 
remapping, it has been hypothesized that the use of an external reference frame 
develops during childhood. Five- to 10-year-old children were therefore tested 
with the tactile TOJ task, both with uncrossed and crossed hands. Overall 
performance in the TOJ task improved with age. While children older than 5 1/2 
years displayed a crossed hand effect, younger children did not. Therefore the 
use of an external reference frame for tactile, and possibly multisensory, 
localization seems to be acquired at age 5.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00845.x
PMID: 19840048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


972. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):854-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00831.x.

Inferring the size of a goal object from an actor's grasping movement in 6- and 
9-month-old infants.

Daum MM(1), Vuori MT, Prinz W, Aschersleben G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain 
Sciences, Leipzig, Germany. moritz.daum@cbs.mpg.de

The present study applied a preferential looking paradigm to test whether 6- and 
9-month old infants are able to infer the size of a goal object from an actor's 
grasping movement. The target object was a cup with the handle rotated either 
towards or away from the actor. In two experiments, infants saw the video of an 
actor's grasping movement towards an occluded target object. The aperture size 
of the actor's hand was varied as between-subjects factor. Subsequently, two 
final states of the grasping movement were presented simultaneously with the 
occluder being removed. In Experiment 1, the expected final state showed the 
actor's hand holding a cup in a way that would be expected after the performed 
grasping movement. In the unexpected final state, the actor's hand held the cup 
at the side which would be unexpected after the performed grasping movement. 
Results show that 6- as well as 9-month-olds looked longer at the unexpected 
than at the expected final state. Experiment 2 excluded an alternative 
explanation of these findings, namely that the discrimination of the final 
states was due to geometrical familiarity or novelty of the final states. These 
findings provide evidence that infants are able to infer the size of a goal 
object from the aperture size of the actor's hand during the grasp.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00831.x
PMID: 19840041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


973. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):825-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00918.x.

Executive functions in adolescence: inferences from brain and behavior.

Crone EA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Psychology, Leiden University, The Netherlands. 
ecrone@fsw.leidenuniv.nl

Despite the advances in understanding cognitive improvements in executive 
function in adolescence, much less is known about the influence of affective and 
social modulators on executive function and the biological underpinnings of 
these functions and sensitivities. Here, recent behavioral and neuroscientific 
studies are summarized that have used different approaches (cognition, emotion, 
individual differences and training) in the study of adolescent executive 
functions. The combination of these different approaches gives new insight into 
this complex transitional phase in life, and marks adolescence as not only a 
period of vulnerabilities, but also great opportunities in terms of training 
possibilities and interventions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00918.x
PMID: 19840037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


974. Dev Sci. 2009 Sep;12(5):784-97. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00836.x.

Biased decision-making: developing an understanding of how positive and negative 
relationships may skew judgments.

Mills CM(1), Grant MG.

Author information:
(1)School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences, The University of Texas at Dallas, 
Dallas, TX, USA. candice.mills@utdallas.edu

The current experiment examines if and when children consider the possibility of 
relationships skewing judgments when evaluating judgments in different contexts. 
Eighty-seven 6-year-olds, 8-year-olds, 10-year-olds, and adults heard stories 
about judges who made decisions matching or mismatching possible relationship 
biases (e.g. a judge choosing a friend or an enemy as the winner) in contests 
with objective or subjective criteria. While even 6-year-olds distinguished 
between subjective and objective contests, neither children nor adults focused 
on the objectivity of the contest criteria when evaluating a judge's claims. 
Instead, by age 8, if not earlier, children focused on relationships, trusting 
judgments that mismatched someone's relationship biases and discounting 
judgments that matched someone's relationship biases. The findings also 
suggested that children are better at recognizing that a judgment may have been 
biased than predicting that one will be, and that they may understand that 
negative relationships may skew judgments before positive ones.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00836.x
PMID: 19702770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


975. Dev Sci. 2009 Sep;12(5):732-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00817.x.

Speech-perception-in-noise deficits in dyslexia.

Ziegler JC(1), Pech-Georgel C, George F, Lorenzi C.

Author information:
(1)Département de Psychologie, Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France. 
Johannes.Ziegler@univ-provence.fr

Speech perception deficits in developmental dyslexia were investigated in quiet 
and various noise conditions. Dyslexics exhibited clear speech perception 
deficits in noise but not in silence. Place-of-articulation was more affected 
than voicing or manner-of-articulation. Speech-perception-in-noise deficits 
persisted when performance of dyslexics was compared to that of much younger 
children matched on reading age, underscoring the fundamental nature of 
speech-perception-in-noise deficits. The deficits were not due to poor spectral 
or temporal resolution because dyslexics exhibited normal 'masking release' 
effects (i.e. better performance in fluctuating than in stationary noise). 
Moreover, speech-perception-in-noise predicted significant unique variance in 
reading even after controlling for low-level auditory, attentional, speech 
output, short-term memory and phonological awareness processes. Finally, the 
presence of external noise did not seem to be a necessary condition for speech 
perception deficits to occur because similar deficits were obtained when speech 
was degraded by eliminating temporal fine-structure cues without using external 
noise. In conclusion, the core deficit of dyslexics seems to be a lack of speech 
robustness in the presence of external or internal noise.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00817.x
PMID: 19702766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


976. Dev Sci. 2009 Sep;12(5):706-14. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00818.x.

The shift in infant preferences for vowel duration and pitch contour between 6 
and 10 months of age.

Kitamura C(1), Notley A.

Author information:
(1)MARCS Auditory Laboratories, University of Western Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia. c.kitamura@uws.edu.au

This study investigates the influence of the acoustic properties of vowels on 6- 
and 10-month-old infants' speech preferences. The shape of the contour (bell or 
monotonic) and the duration (normal or stretched) of vowels were manipulated in 
words containing the vowels /i/ and /u/, and presented to infants using a 
two-choice preference procedure. Experiment 1 examined contour shape: infants 
heard either normal-duration bell-shaped and monotonic contours, or the same two 
contours with stretched duration. The results show that 6-month-olds preferred 
bell to monotonic contours, whereas 10-month-olds preferred monotonic to bell 
contours. In Experiment 2, infants heard either normal-duration and stretched 
bell contours, or normal-duration and stretched monotonic contours. As in 
Experiment 1, infants showed age-specific preferences, with 6-month-olds 
preferring stretched vowels, and 10-month-olds preferring normal-duration 
vowels. Infants' attention to the acoustic qualities of vowels, and to speech in 
general, undergoes a dramatic transformation in the final months of the first 
year, a transformation that aligns with the emergence of other developmental 
milestones in speech perception.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00818.x
PMID: 19702763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


977. Dev Sci. 2009 Sep;12(5):699-705. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00819.x.

Young children separate multiple pretend worlds.

Weisberg DS(1), Bloom P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, USA. deenasw@ruccs.rutgers.edu

Each fictional world that adults create has its own distinct properties, 
separating it from other fictional worlds. Here we explore whether this 
separation also exists for young children's pretend game worlds. Studies 1 and 
1A set up two simultaneous games and encouraged children to create appropriate 
pretend identities for coloured blocks. When prompted with a situation that 
required the use of a Game 1 object in Game 2, 3- and 4-year-olds were reluctant 
to move pretend objects between games, even when the alternative-world object 
was explicitly highlighted as a possible choice. Study 2 found the same effect 
when the two game worlds were presented sequentially. This suggests that, even 
for young children, multiple pretend game worlds are kept psychologically 
separate.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00819.x
PMID: 19702762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


978. Dev Sci. 2009 Jul;12(4):647-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00811.x.

A temporal discriminability account of children's eyewitness suggestibility.

Bright-Paul A(1), Jarrold C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Bristol, UK. 
a.m.bright-paul@bristol.ac.uk

Children's suggestibility is typically measured using a three-stage 
'event-misinformation-test' procedure. We examined whether suggestibility is 
influenced by the time delays imposed between these stages, and in particular 
whether the temporal discriminability of sources (event and misinformation) 
predicts performance. In a novel approach, the degree of source discriminability 
was calculated as the relative magnitude of two intervals (the ratio of 
event-misinformation and misinformation-test intervals), based on an adaptation 
of existing 'ratio-rule' accounts of memory. Five-year-olds (n =150) watched an 
event, and were exposed to misinformation, before memory for source was tested. 
The absolute event-test delay (12 versus 24 days) and the 'ratio' of 
event-misinformation/misinformation-test intervals (11:1, 3:1, 1:1, 1:3 and 
1:11) were manipulated across participants. The temporal discriminability of 
sources, measured by the ratio, was indeed a strong predictor of suggestibility. 
Most importantly, if the ratio was constant (e.g. 18/6 versus 9/3 days), 
performance was remarkably similar despite variations in absolute delay (e.g. 24 
versus 12 days). This intriguing finding not only extends the ratio-rule of 
distinctiveness to misinformation paradigms, but also serves to illustrate a new 
empirical means of differentiating between explanations of suggestibility based 
on interference between sources and disintegration of source information over 
time.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00811.x
PMID: 19635090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


979. Dev Sci. 2009 Jul;12(4):634-46. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00807.x.

Differences in the neural mechanisms of selective attention in children from 
different socioeconomic backgrounds: an event-related brain potential study.

Stevens C(1), Lauinger B, Neville H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA. 
cstevens@willamette.edu

Previous research indicates that children from lower socioeconomic backgrounds 
show deficits in aspects of attention, including a reduced ability to filter 
irrelevant information and to suppress prepotent responses. However, less is 
known about the neural mechanisms of group differences in attention, which could 
reveal the stages of processing at which attention deficits arise. The present 
study examined this question using an event-related brain potential (ERP) 
measure of selective auditory attention. Thirty-two children aged from 3 to 8 
years participated in the study. Children were cued to attend selectively to one 
of two simultaneously presented narrative stories. The stories differed in 
location (left/right speaker), narration voice (male/female), and content. ERPs 
were recorded to linguistic and non-linguistic probe stimuli embedded in the 
attended and unattended stories. Children whose mothers had lower levels of 
educational attainment (no college experience) showed reduced effects of 
selective attention on neural processing relative to children whose mothers had 
higher levels of educational attainment (at least some college). These 
differences occurred by 100 milliseconds after probe onset. Furthermore, the 
differences were related specifically to a reduced ability to filter irrelevant 
information (i.e. to suppress the response to sounds in the unattended channel) 
among children whose mothers had lower levels of education. These data provide 
direct evidence for differences in the earliest stages of processing within 
neural systems mediating selective attention in children from different 
socioeconomic backgrounds. Results are discussed in the context of intervention 
programs aimed at improving attention and self-regulation abilities in children 
at-risk for school failure.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00807.x
PMCID: PMC2718768
PMID: 19635089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


980. Dev Sci. 2009 Jul;12(4):626-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00801.x.

Do different measures tap the same genetic influences? A multi-method study of 
activity level in young twins.

Saudino KJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Psychology Department, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA. 
ksaudino@bu.edu

Activity level (AL) is a highly salient feature of child behaviour that has been 
linked to developmental outcome. Twin studies of parent-rated, observer-rated 
and mechanically assessed AL in childhood find that AL is genetically 
influenced. Few studies, however, consider whether different methods of 
assessing AL have a shared genetic etiology. Those that do, confound methods and 
situations. The present study examined whether actigraph and rater-based 
(parent, observer) measures of AL tap the same genetic influences in a sample of 
312 2-year-old twin pairs. Methods were studied within the same situation, 
thereby controlling for situational influences on AL. The genetic correlation 
between actigraph and parent-rated AL in the home was .38, indicating modest 
genetic overlap between the two methods. In contrast, the correlation of genetic 
effects on actigraph and observer-rated AL in the laboratory was .95, indicating 
that both laboratory-based measures of AL are influenced by the same genetic 
effects.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00801.x
PMCID: PMC2719837
PMID: 19635088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


981. Dev Sci. 2009 Jul;12(4):614-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00816.x.

Differential effects of social and non-social reward on response inhibition in 
children and adolescents.

Kohls G(1), Peltzer J, Herpertz-Dahlmann B, Konrad K.

Author information:
(1)Child Neuropsychology Section, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 
and Psychotherapy, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. gkohls@ukaachen.de

An important issue in the field of clinical and developmental psychopathology is 
whether cognitive control processes, such as response inhibition, can be 
specifically enhanced by motivation. To determine whether non-social (i.e. 
monetary) and social (i.e. positive facial expressions) rewards are able to 
differentially improve response inhibition accuracy in typically developing 
children and adolescents, an 'incentive' go/no-go task was applied with reward 
contingencies for successful inhibition. In addition, the impact of children's 
personality traits (such as reward seeking and empathy) on monetary and social 
reward responsiveness was assessed in 65 boys, ages 8 to 12 years. All subjects 
were tested twice: At baseline, inhibitory control was assessed without reward, 
and then subjects were pseudorandomly assigned to one of four experimental 
conditions, including (1) social reward only, (2) monetary reward only, (3) 
mixed social and monetary reward, or (4) a retest condition without reward. Both 
social and non-social reward significantly improved task performance, although 
larger effects were observed for monetary reward. The higher the children scored 
on reward seeking scales, the larger was their improvement in response 
inhibition, but only if monetary reward was used. In addition, there was a 
tendency for an association between empathic skills and benefits from social 
reward. These data suggest that social incentives do not have an equally strong 
reinforcing value as compared to financial incentives. However, different 
personality traits seem to determine to what extent a child profits from 
different types of reward. Clinical implications regarding probable 
hyposensitivity to social reward in subjects with autism and dysregulated 
reward-seeking behaviour in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD) are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00816.x
PMID: 19635087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


982. Dev Sci. 2009 Jul;12(4):549-56. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00795.x.

Relational memory during infancy: evidence from eye tracking.

Richmond J(1), Nelson CA.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital Boston and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
jrichmond@psy.unsw.edu.au

Here we report evidence from a new eye-tracking measure of relational memory 
that suggests that 9-month-old infants can encode memories in terms of the 
relations among items, a function putatively subserved by the hippocampus. 
Infants learned about the association between faces that were superimposed on 
unique scenic backgrounds. During test trials, infants were shown three faces 
presented on a familiar scene. All three faces were equally familiar; however, 
one had been presented with the test background earlier. Visual behavior was 
recorded continuously using a TOBII eye tracker. Infants looked preferentially 
at the face that matched the test background very early in the trial; however, 
the time course of this preferential looking effect varied as a function of 
delay. These results suggest that by 9 months of age infants can form memories 
that represent the relations among items and maintain them over short delays.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00795.x
PMID: 19635082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


983. Dev Sci. 2009 Jul;12(4):510-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00796.x.

Slow echo: facial EMG evidence for the delay of spontaneous, but not voluntary, 
emotional mimicry in children with autism spectrum disorders.

Oberman LM(1), Winkielman P, Ramachandran VS.

Author information:
(1)Center for Brain and Cognition, UC San Diego, USA. loberman@bidmc.harvard.edu

Spontaneous mimicry, including that of emotional facial expressions, is 
important for socio-emotional skills such as empathy and communication. Those 
skills are often impacted in autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Successful mimicry 
requires not only the activation of the response, but also its appropriate 
speed. Yet, previous studies examined ASD differences in only response 
magnitude. The current study investigated timing and magnitude of spontaneous 
and voluntary mimicry in ASD children and matched controls using facial 
electromyography (EMG). First, participants viewed and recognized happy, sad, 
fear, anger, disgust and neutral expressions presented at different durations. 
Later, participants voluntarily mimicked the expressions. There were no group 
differences on emotion recognition and amplitude of expression-appropriate EMG 
activity. However, ASD participants' spontaneous, but not voluntary, mimicry 
activity was delayed by about 160 ms. This delay occurred across different 
expressions and presentation durations. We relate these findings to the 
literature on mirroring and temporal dynamics of social interaction.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00796.x
PMID: 19635079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


984. Dev Sci. 2009 Jul;12(4):504-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00794.x.

Information from multiple modalities helps 5-month-olds learn abstract rules.

Frank MC(1), Slemmer JA, Marcus GF, Johnson SP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. mcfrank@mit.edu

Erratum in
    Dev Sci. 2013 Mar;16(2):324.
    Dev Sci. 2013 Mar;16(2):324.

By 7 months of age, infants are able to learn rules based on the abstract 
relationships between stimuli (Marcus et al., 1999), but they are better able to 
do so when exposed to speech than to some other classes of stimuli. In the 
current experiments we ask whether multimodal stimulus information will aid 
younger infants in identifying abstract rules. We habituated 5-month-olds to 
simple abstract patterns (ABA or ABB) instantiated in coordinated looming visual 
shapes and speech sounds (Experiment 1), shapes alone (Experiment 2), and speech 
sounds accompanied by uninformative but coordinated shapes (Experiment 3). 
Infants showed evidence of rule learning only in the presence of the informative 
multimodal cues. We hypothesize that the additional evidence present in these 
multimodal displays was responsible for the success of younger infants in 
learning rules, congruent with both a Bayesian account and with the Intersensory 
Redundancy Hypothesis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00794.x
PMCID: PMC2718773
PMID: 19635078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


985. Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):453-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00781.x.

The relative salience of discrete and continuous quantity in young infants.

Cordes S(1), Brannon EM.

Author information:
(1)Duke University Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Durham, NC 27708, USA. 
scordes@duke.edu

Whether human infants spontaneously represent number remains contentious. 
Clearfield & Mix (1999) and Feigenson, Carey & Spelke (2002) put forth evidence 
that when presented with small sets of 1-3 items infants may preferentially 
attend to continuous properties of stimuli rather than to number, and these 
results have been interpreted as evidence that infants may not have numerical 
competence. Here we present three experiments that test the hypothesis that 
infants prefer to represent continuous variables over number. In Experiment 1, 
we attempt to replicate the Clearfield & Mix study with a larger sample of 
infants. Although we replicated their finding that infants attend to changes in 
contour length, infants in our study attended to number and perimeter/area 
simultaneously. In Experiments 2 and 3, we pit number against continuous extent 
for exclusively large sets (Experiment 2) and for small and large sets combined 
(Experiment 3). In all three experiments, infants noticed the change in number, 
suggesting that representing discrete quantity is not a last resort for human 
infants. These results should temper the conclusion that infants find continuous 
properties more salient than number and instead suggest that number is 
spontaneously represented by young infants, even when other cues are available.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00781.x
PMCID: PMC2949063
PMID: 19371370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


986. Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):419-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00788.x.

French-learning toddlers use gender information on determiners during word 
recognition.

van Heugten M(1), Shi R.

Author information:
(1)Département de psychologie, Université du Québec à Montréal, Canada. 
marieke.vanheugten@utoronto.ca

In gender-marking languages, the gender of the noun determines the form of the 
preceding article. In this study, we examined whether French-learning toddlers 
use gender-marking information on determiners to recognize words. In a 
split-screen preferential looking experiment, 25-month-olds were presented with 
picture pairs that referred to nouns with either the same or different genders. 
The target word in the auditory instruction was preceded either by the correct 
or incorrect gender-marked definite article. Toddlers' looking times to target 
shortly after article onset demonstrated that target words were processed most 
efficiently in different-gender grammatical trials. While target processing in 
same-gender grammatical trials recovered in the subsequent time window, 
ungrammatical articles continued to affect processing efficiency until much 
later in the trial. These results indicate that by 25 months of age, 
French-learning toddlers use gender information on determiners when 
comprehending subsequent nouns.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00788.x
PMID: 19371366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


987. Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):412-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00789.x.

Fourteen-month-old infants learn similar-sounding words.

Yoshida KA(1), Fennell CT, Swingley D, Werker JF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Canada.

Can infants, in the very first stages of word learning, use their perceptual 
sensitivity to the phonetics of speech while learning words? Research to date 
suggests that infants of 14 months cannot learn two similar-sounding words 
unless there is substantial contextual support. The current experiment advances 
our understanding of this failure by testing whether the source of infants' 
difficulty lies in the learning or testing phase. Infants were taught to 
associate two similar-sounding words with two different objects, and tested 
using a visual choice method rather than the standard Switch task. The results 
reveal that 14-month-olds are capable of learning and mapping two 
similar-sounding labels; they can apply phonetic detail in new words. The 
findings are discussed in relation to infants' concurrent failure, and the 
developmental transition to success, in the Switch task.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00789.x
PMCID: PMC2883913
PMID: 19371365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


988. Dev Sci. 2009 Mar;12(2):326-38. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00785.x.

Adult brains don't fully overcome biases that lead to incorrect performance 
during cognitive development: an fMRI study in young adults completing a 
Piaget-like task.

Leroux G(1), Spiess J, Zago L, Rossi S, Lubin A, Turbelin MR, Mazoyer B, 
Tzourio-Mazoyer N, Houdé O, Joliot M.

Author information:
(1)Groupe d'Imagerie Neurofonctionnelle, Universities of Caen and Paris 
Descartes, Caen, France.

A current issue in developmental science is that greater continuity in cognition 
between children and adults may exist than is usually appreciated in Piaget-like 
(stages or 'staircase') models. This phenomenon has been demonstrated at the 
behavioural level, but never at the brain level. Here we show with functional 
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), for the first time, that adult brains do not 
fully overcome the biases of childhood. More specifically, the aim of this fMRI 
study was to evaluate whether the perceptual bias that leads to incorrect 
performance during cognitive development in a Piaget-like task is still a bias 
in the adult brain and hence requires an executive network to overcome it. Here, 
we compared two numerical-judgment tasks, one being a Piaget-like task with 
number-length interference (called 'INT') and the other being a control task 
with number-length covariation ('COV'). We also used a colour-detection task to 
control for stimuli numerosity, spatial distribution, and frequency. Our 
behavioural results confirmed that INT remains a difficult task for young 
adults. Indeed, response times were significantly higher in INT than in COV. 
Moreover, we observed that only in INT did response times increase linearly as a 
function of the number of items. The fMRI results indicate that the brain 
network common to INT and COV shows a large rightward functional asymmetry, 
emphasizing the visuospatial nature of these two tasks. When INT was compared 
with COV, activations were found within a right frontal network, including the 
pre-supplementary motor area, the anterior cingulate cortex, and the middle 
frontal gyrus, which probably reflect detection of the number/length conflict 
and inhibition of the 'length-equals-number' response strategy. Finally, 
activations related to visuospatial and quantitative processing, enhanced or 
specifically recruited in the Piaget-like task, were found in bilateral 
posterior areas.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00785.x
PMID: 19143805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


989. Dev Sci. 2009 Mar;12(2):289-96. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00756.x.

Rethinking attentional development: reflexive and volitional orienting in 
children and adults.

Ristic J(1), Kingstone A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California Santa Barbara, CA 
93106-9660, USA. ristic@psych.ucsb.edu

It is thought that a child takes the first 8 years of life to develop an 
adult-like volitional attention system. The data that support this belief, 
however, are based on studies that inadvertently measured a combination of 
volitional and reflexive attention, rather than volitional attention alone. What 
is immature then in children that are younger than 8 years of age? The 
volitional attention system or the manner that volitional and reflexive 
attention systems combine? We investigated this issue, with preschool and adult 
populations, by first isolating and then combining volitional and reflexive 
attention systems. Our results indicate that both volitional attention, and the 
way it combines with reflexive orienting, are immature in preschool children. We 
suggest that when volitional attention becomes adult-like its combination with 
reflexive attention will also become mature.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00756.x
PMID: 19143801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


990. Dev Sci. 2009 Mar;12(2):272-88. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00759.x.

Using the antisaccade task to investigate the relationship between the 
development of inhibition and the development of intelligence.

Michel F(1), Anderson M.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Western Australia, Australia. 
fiona1michel@yahoo.com.au

A number of authors have proposed models of cognitive development that explain 
improvements in intelligence over the course of childhood via changes in the 
efficiency of inhibitory processes (Anderson, 2001; Bjorklund & Harnishfeger, 
1990; Dempster, 1991, 1992; Dempster & Corkill, 1999a; Harnishfeger, 1995; 
Harnishfeger & Bjorklund, 1993). A review of the literature reveals little 
empirical support for the thesis. This is largely due to a failure to 
distinguish between age-related and non-age-related changes in both inhibitory 
ability and intelligence. Empirical evidence is presented from a developmental 
study employing the antisaccade task to provide support for the role of 
inhibitory processes in the development of intelligence. Additionally, a case is 
made for a functional difference underlying antisaccade errors that are 
subsequently corrected and those that remain uncorrected.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00759.x
PMID: 19143800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


991. Dev Sci. 2009 Mar;12(2):264-71. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00758.x.

Infants use shared experience to interpret pointing gestures.

Liebal K(1), Behne T, Carpenter M, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Comparative Psychology, Max Planck Institute 
for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany. kliebal@eva.mpg.de

We investigated whether 1-year-old infants use their shared experience with an 
adult to determine the meaning of a pointing gesture. In the first study, after 
two adults had each shared a different activity with the infant, one of the 
adults pointed to a target object. Eighteen- but not 14-month-olds responded 
appropriately to the pointing gesture based on the particular activity they had 
previously shared with that particular adult. In the second study, 14-month-olds 
were successful in a simpler procedure in which the pointing adult either had or 
had not shared a relevant activity with the infant prior to the pointing. 
Infants just beginning to learn language thus already show a complex 
understanding of the pragmatics of cooperative communication in which shared 
experience with particular individuals plays a crucial role.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00758.x
PMID: 19143799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


992. Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):194-200. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00761.x.

Biological and environmental initial conditions shape the trajectories of 
cognitive and social-emotional development across the first years of life.

Feldman R(1), Eidelman AI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and the Gonda Brain Sciences Center, Bar-Ilan 
University, Israel. feldman@mail.biu.ac.il

Human development is thought to evolve from the dynamic interchange of 
biological dispositions and environmental provisions; yet the effects of 
specific biological and environmental birth conditions on the trajectories of 
cognitive and social-emotional growth have rarely been studied. We observed 126 
children at six time-points from birth to 5 years. Intelligence, maternal 
sensitivity, and child social engagement were repeatedly tested. Effects of 
neonatal vagal tone (VT) and maternal postpartum depressive symptoms on 
growth-rates were assessed. Cognitive development showed a substantial 
growth-spurt between 2 and 5 years and social engagement increased rapidly 
across the first year and more gradually thereafter. VT improved cognitive and 
social-emotional growth-rates across the first year, whereas maternal depressive 
symptoms interfered with growth from 2 to 5 years. Differences between infants 
with none, one, or two non-optimal birth conditions increased with age. Findings 
shed light on the dynamics of early development as it is shaped by biological 
and environmental initial conditions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00761.x
PMID: 19120428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


993. Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):188-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00763.x.

Preschoolers continue to trust a more accurate informant 1 week after exposure 
to accuracy information.

Corriveau K(1), Harris PL.

Author information:
(1)Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

To determine whether children retain a preference for a previously accurate 
informant only in the short term or for long-term use, 3- and 4-year-old 
children were tested in two experiments. In both experiments, children were 
given accuracy information about two informants and were subsequently tested for 
their selective trust in the two informants (Experiment 1: immediately, 1 day 
and 1 week later; Experiment 2: immediately, 4 days and 1 week later). Both age 
groups preferred to trust the accurate informant not only immediately after 
receiving accuracy information but also at subsequent time-points. Children who 
were immediately able to explicitly identify the accurate informant were 
significantly more likely to seek and accept information from her 1 week later. 
However, even when they had not been asked to explicitly identify the accurate 
informant both age groups still maintained their preference for her. Thus, by 3 
years of age, children spontaneously choose a previously accurate informant up 
to 1 week after exposure to information regarding her accuracy.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00763.x
PMID: 19120427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


994. Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):114-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00738.x.

What makes relational reasoning smart? Revisiting the perceptual-to-relational 
shift in the development of generalization.

Bulloch MJ(1), Opfer JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, USA.

Development of reasoning is often depicted as involving increasing use of 
relational similarities and decreasing use of perceptual similarities ('the 
perceptual-to-relational shift'). We argue that this shift is a special case of 
a broader developmental trend: increasing sensitivity to the predictive accuracy 
of different similarity types. To test this hypothesis, we asked participants 
(3-, 4-, 5-year-olds and adults) to generalize novel information on two types of 
problems--offspring problems, where relational matches yield accurate 
generalizations, and prey problems, where perceptual matches yield accurate 
generalizations. On offspring problems, we replicated prior findings of 
increasing relational matches with age. However, we observed decreasing 
relational matches on prey problems. Provided feedback on their responses, 
3-year-olds showed the same trend. Findings suggest that the relational shift 
commonly observed in categorization and analogical reasoning may reflect a 
general increase in children's sensitivity to cue validity rather than an 
overall preference to generalize over perceptual similarity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00738.x
PMID: 19120419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


995. Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):106-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00745.x.

Training and transfer effects of executive functions in preschool children.

Thorell LB(1), Lindqvist S, Bergman Nutley S, Bohlin G, Klingberg T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Stockholm Brain Institute, Karolinska 
Institutet, Sweden. lisa.thorell@ki.se

Executive functions, including working memory and inhibition, are of central 
importance to much of human behavior. Interventions intended to improve 
executive functions might therefore serve an important purpose. Previous studies 
show that working memory can be improved by training, but it is unknown if this 
also holds for inhibition, and whether it is possible to train executive 
functions in preschoolers. In the present study, preschool children received 
computerized training of either visuo-spatial working memory or inhibition for 5 
weeks. An active control group played commercially available computer games, and 
a passive control group took part in only pre- and posttesting. Children trained 
on working memory improved significantly on trained tasks; they showed training 
effects on non-trained tests of spatial and verbal working memory, as well as 
transfer effects to attention. Children trained on inhibition showed a 
significant improvement over time on two out of three trained task paradigms, 
but no significant improvements relative to the control groups on tasks 
measuring working memory or attention. In neither of the two interventions were 
there effects on non-trained inhibitory tasks. The results suggest that working 
memory training can have significant effects also among preschool children. The 
finding that inhibition could not be improved by either one of the two training 
programs might be due to the particular training program used in the present 
study or possibly indicate that executive functions differ in how easily they 
can be improved by training, which in turn might relate to differences in their 
underlying psychological and neural processes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00745.x
PMID: 19120418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


996. Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):67-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00747.x.

Developmental changes in visual object recognition between 18 and 24 months of 
age.

Pereira AF(1), Smith LB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University 
Bloomington, IN 47405, USA. afpereir@indiana.edu

Two experiments examined developmental changes in children's visual recognition 
of common objects during the period of 18 to 24 months. Experiment 1 examined 
children's ability to recognize common category instances that presented three 
different kinds of information: (1) richly detailed and prototypical instances 
that presented both local and global shape information, color, textural and 
featural information, (2) the same rich and prototypical shapes but no color, 
texture or surface featural information, or (3) that presented only abstract and 
global representations of object shape in terms of geometric volumes. 
Significant developmental differences were observed only for the abstract shape 
representations in terms of geometric volumes, the kind of shape representation 
that has been hypothesized to underlie mature object recognition. Further, these 
differences were strongly linked in individual children to the number of object 
names in their productive vocabulary. Experiment 2 replicated these results and 
showed further that the less advanced children's object recognition was based on 
the piecemeal use of individual features and parts, rather than overall shape. 
The results provide further evidence for significant and rapid developmental 
changes in object recognition during the same period children first learn object 
names. The implications of the results for theories of visual object 
recognition, the relation of object recognition to category learning, and 
underlying developmental processes are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00747.x
PMCID: PMC2888029
PMID: 19120414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


997. Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):41-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00750.x.

Identifying unreliable informants: do children excuse past inaccuracy?

Nurmsoo E(1), Robinson EJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Warwick, UK.

In three experiments (N = 123; 148; 28), children observed a video in which two 
speakers offered alternative labels for unfamiliar objects. In Experiment 1, 3- 
to 5-year-olds endorsed the label given by a speaker who had previously labeled 
familiar objects accurately, rather than that given by a speaker with a history 
of inaccurate labeling, even when the inaccurate speaker erred only while 
blindfolded. In Experiments 2 and 3, 3- to 7-year-olds showed no preference for 
the label given by a previously inaccurate but blindfolded speaker, over that 
given by a second inaccurate speaker with no obvious excuse for erring. Children 
based their endorsements on speakers' history of accuracy or inaccuracy 
irrespective of the speakers' information access at the time, raising doubts 
that children made mentalistic interpretations of speakers' inaccuracy.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00750.x
PMID: 19120411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


998. Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):26-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00769.x.

Cue salience and infant perseverative reaching: tests of the dynamic field 
theory.

Clearfield MW(1), Dineva E, Smith LB, Diedrich FJ, Thelen E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Whitman College, Walla Walla, WA 99362, USA. 
clearfmw@whitman.edu

Skilled behavior requires a balance between previously successful behaviors and 
new behaviors appropriate to the present context. We describe a dynamic field 
model for understanding this balance in infant perseverative reaching. The model 
predictions are tested with regard to the interaction of two aspects of the 
typical perseverative reaching task: the visual cue indicating the target and 
the memory demand created by the delay imposed between cueing and reaching. The 
memory demand was manipulated by imposing either a 0- or a 3-second delay, and 
the salience of the cue to reach was systematically varied. Infants demonstrated 
fewer perseverative errors at 0-delay versus 3-second delay based on the cue 
salience, such that a more salient visual cue was necessary to overcome a longer 
delay. These results have important implications for understanding both the 
basic perceptual-motor processes that produce reaching in infants and skilled 
flexible behavior in general.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00769.x
PMCID: PMC2888518
PMID: 19120410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


999. Dev Sci. 2008 Nov;11(6):853-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00734.x.

Infants prefer motionese to adult-directed action.

Brand RJ(1), Shallcross WL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Villanova University, Villanova, PA 19085, USA. 
Rebecca.brand@villanova.edu

In two studies, we investigated infants' preference for infant-directed (ID) 
action or 'motionese' (Brand, Baldwin & Ashburn, 2002) relative to 
adult-directed (AD) action. In Study 1, full-featured videos were shown to 32 6- 
to 8-month-olds, who demonstrated a strong preference for ID action. In Study 2, 
infants at 6-8 months (n= 28) and 11-13 months (n= 24) were shown either 
standard ID and AD clips, or clips in which demonstrators' faces were blurred to 
obscure emotional and eye-gaze information. Across both ages, infants showed 
evidence of preferring ID to AD action, even when faces were blurred. Infants 
did not have a preference for still-frame images of the demonstrators, 
indicating that the ID preference arose from action characteristics, not 
demonstrators' general appearance. These results suggest that motionese enhances 
infants' attention to action, possibly supporting infants' learning.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00734.x
PMID: 19046154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1000. Dev Sci. 2008 Nov;11(6):847-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00733.x.

Toddlers' joint engagement experience facilitates preschoolers' acquisition of 
theory of mind.

Nelson PB(1), Adamson LB, Bakeman R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA 30303, USA. 
pnelson3@gsu.edu

Forty-two children participated in a longitudinal study that investigated the 
relationship between their joint engagement experience when toddlers and their 
development of theory of mind when preschoolers. Controlling for language 
comprehension at 30 months, higher preschool false belief scores were associated 
with more time in coordinated joint engagement earlier (18-21 mo, beta= .34) and 
in symbol-infused joint engagement later (27-30 mo, beta= .35) in toddlerhood. 
Findings suggest that the early foundation of theory of mind development is laid 
as toddlers attend to both social-emotional and symbolic aspects of shared 
events.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00733.x
PMCID: PMC2640940
PMID: 19046153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1001. Dev Sci. 2008 Nov;11(6):828-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00731.x.

Ontogeny of manipulative behavior and nut-cracking in young tufted capuchin 
monkeys (Cebus apella): a perception-action perspective.

de Resende BD(1), Ottoni EB, Fragaszy DM.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychology, Department of Experimental Psychology, University of 
Sao Paulo, Brazil. briseida@usp.br

How do capuchin monkeys learn to use stones to crack open nuts? 
Perception-action theory posits that individuals explore producing varying 
spatial and force relations among objects and surfaces, thereby learning about 
affordances of such relations and how to produce them. Such learning supports 
the discovery of tool use. We present longitudinal developmental data from 
semifree-ranging tufted capuchin monkeys (Cebus apella) to evaluate predictions 
arising from Perception-action theory linking manipulative development and the 
onset of tool-using. Percussive actions bringing an object into contact with a 
surface appeared within the first year of life. Most infants readily struck nuts 
and other objects against stones or other surfaces from 6 months of age, but 
percussive actions alone were not sufficient to produce nut-cracking sequences. 
Placing the nut on the anvil surface and then releasing it, so that it could be 
struck with a stone, was the last element necessary for nut-cracking to appear 
in capuchins. Young chimpanzees may face a different challenge in learning to 
crack nuts: they readily place objects on surfaces and release them, but rarely 
vigorously strike objects against surfaces or other objects. Thus the challenges 
facing the two species in developing the same behavior (nut-cracking using a 
stone hammer and an anvil) may be quite different. Capuchins must inhibit a 
strong bias to hold nuts so that they can release them; chimpanzees must 
generate a percussive action rather than a gentle placing action. Generating the 
right actions may be as challenging as achieving the right sequence of actions 
in both species. Our analysis suggests a new direction for studies of social 
influence on young primates learning sequences of actions involving manipulation 
of objects in relation to surfaces.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00731.x
PMID: 19046151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1002. Dev Sci. 2008 Nov;11(6):819-27. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00730.x.

Go or no-go? Developmental improvements in the efficiency of response inhibition 
in mid-childhood.

Cragg L(1), Nation K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, UK. 
lucy.cragg@nottingham.ac.uk

This experiment used a modified go/no-go paradigm to investigate the processes 
by which response inhibition becomes more efficient during mid-childhood. The 
novel task, which measured trials on which a response was initiated but not 
completed, was sensitive to developmental changes in response inhibition. The 
effect of inducing time pressure by narrowing allowable response time was also 
examined. While increasing time pressure did not reduce the inhibitory demands 
of the task for either age group, older children (aged 9 to 11 years) were able 
to inhibit their responses at an earlier stage of movement than younger children 
(aged 5 to 7 years). This shows that as children get older they become more 
efficient at controlling their behaviour which drives developmental improvements 
in response inhibition.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00730.x
PMID: 19046150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1003. Dev Sci. 2008 Nov;11(6):809-18. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00727.x.

Young children's knowledge about the influence of thoughts on emotions in rule 
situations.

Lagattuta KH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Center for Mind and Brain, University of 
California, Davis, CA 95616, USA. khlaga@ucdavis.edu

Four-year-olds, 5-year-olds, and adults (N = 48) listened to stories featuring 
characters that experienced one of four types of thoughts after deciding to 
transgress or comply with a rule: thoughts about desires, rules, future negative 
outcomes, or future punishment. Participants predicted and explained the 
characters' emotions. Results showed that young children, as with adults, 
predicted positive emotions for willpower and negative emotions for 
transgression at low rates for the think-desire trials, and at high rates for 
the think-rule and think-future trials. They also modified their emotion 
explanations in line with the focus of characters' thoughts. These data provide 
unprecedented evidence that young children can reason flexibly about emotions in 
rule situations when provided explicit, salient information about people's 
thoughts.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00727.x
PMID: 19046149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1004. Dev Sci. 2008 Sep;11(5):778-92. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00729.x.

How young children and chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) perceive objects in a 2D 
display: putting an assumption to the test.

Leighty KA(1), Menzel CR, Fragaszy DM.

Author information:
(1)Education and Science, Animal Programs Administration, Disney's Animal 
Kingdom, Lake Buena Vista, FL 32830, USA. Katherine.Leighty@Disney.com

Object recognition research is typically conducted using 2D stimuli in lieu of 
3D objects. This study investigated the amount and complexity of knowledge 
gained from 2D stimuli in adult chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and young children 
(aged 3 and 4 years) using a titrated series of cross-dimensional search tasks. 
Results indicate that 3-year-old children utilize a response rule guided by 
local features to solve cross-dimensional tasks. Four-year-old toddlers and 
adult chimpanzees use information about object form and compositional structure 
from a 2D image to guide their search in three dimensions. Findings have 
specific implications to research conducted in object recognition/perception and 
broad relevance to all areas of research and daily living that incorporate 2D 
displays.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00729.x
PMID: 18801134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1005. Dev Sci. 2008 Sep;11(5):761-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00726.x.

To see or not to see: infants prefer to follow the gaze of a reliable looker.

Chow V(1), Poulin-Dubois D, Lewis J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Concordia University, Montréal, Québec, Canada. 
vchow@alcor.concordia.ca

In two experiments, we examined whether 14-month-olds understand the subjective 
nature of gaze. In the first experiment, infants first observed an experimenter 
express happiness as she looked inside a container that either contained a toy 
(reliable looker condition) or was empty (unreliable looker condition). Then, 
infants had to follow the same experimenter's gaze to a target object located 
either behind or in front of a barrier. Infants in the reliable looker condition 
followed the experimenter's gaze behind the barrier more often than infants in 
the unreliable looker condition, whereas both groups followed the experimenter's 
gaze to the target object located in front of the barrier equally often. In the 
second experiment, infants did not generalize their knowledge about the 
unreliability of a looker to a second 'naïve' looker. These findings suggest 
that 14-month-old infants adapt their gaze following as a function of their past 
experience with the looker.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00726.x
PMID: 18801132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1006. Dev Sci. 2008 Sep;11(5):722-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00722.x.

The effect of social engagement on 24-month-olds' imitation from live and 
televised models.

Nielsen M(1), Simcock G, Jenkins L.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Early Cognitive Development Unit, University of 
Queensland, Australia. nielsen@psy.uq.edu.au

To date, developmental research has rarely addressed the notion that imitation 
serves an interpersonal, socially based function. The present research thus 
examined the role of social engagement on 24-month-olds' imitation by 
manipulating the social availability of the model. In Experiment 1, the children 
were more likely to imitate the exact actions of a live socially responsive 
model compared to a videotaped model who could not provide socially contingent 
feedback. In Experiment 2, the children were more likely to imitate the exact 
actions of a model with whom they could communicate via a closed-circuit TV 
system than a videotaped model who could not provide interactive feedback. This 
research provides clear evidence that children's imitative behavior is affected 
by the social nature of the model. These findings are discussed in relation to 
theories on imitation and the video deficit.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00722.x
PMID: 18801128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1007. Dev Sci. 2008 Sep;11(5):703-11. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00720.x.

Children's understanding of idioms and theory of mind development.

Caillies S(1), Le Sourn-Bissaoui S.

Author information:
(1)CLEA, University of Reims, Reims, France. stephanie.caillies@univ-reims.fr

The aim of this study was to test the hypothesis according to which theory of 
mind competence was a prerequisite to ambiguous idioms understanding. We 
hypothesized that the child needs to understand that the literal interpretation 
could be a false world representation, a false belief, and that the speaker's 
intention is to mean something else, to correctly process idiomatic expressions. 
Two kinds of ambiguous idioms were of interest: decomposable and nondecomposable 
expressions (Titone & Connine, 1999). An experiment was designed to assess the 
figurative developmental changes that occur with theory of mind competence. 
Five-, 6- and 7-year-old children performed five theory of mind tasks (an 
appearance-reality task, three false-belief tasks and a second-order 
false-belief task) and listened to decomposable and nondecomposable idiomatic 
expressions inserted in context, before performing a multiple choice task. 
Results indicated that only nondecomposable idiomatic expression was predicted 
from the theory of mind scores, and particularly from the second-order 
competences. Results are discussed with respect to theory of mind and verbal 
competences.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00720.x
PMID: 18801126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1008. Dev Sci. 2008 Sep;11(5):650-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00713.x.

Individual differences in numerical abilities in preschoolers.

Dowker A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 
ann.dowker@psy.ox.ac.uk

This study investigated individual differences in different aspects of early 
number concepts in preschoolers. Eighty 4-year-olds from Oxford nursery classes 
took part. They were tested on accuracy of counting sets of objects; the 
cardinal word principle; the order irrelevance principle; and predicting the 
results of repeated addition and subtraction by 1 from a set of objects. There 
were marked individual differences for most tasks. Most children were reasonably 
proficient at counting and 70% understood the cardinal word principle. Based on 
the results of a repeated addition and subtraction by 1 task, the children were 
divided into three approximately equal groups: those who were already able to 
use an internalized counting sequence for the simplest forms of addition and 
subtraction; those who relied on a repeated 'counting-all' procedure for such 
tasks; and those who were as yet unable to cope with such tasks. In each group, 
significant relationships between some, but not all, of the numerical tasks were 
found. However, for almost any two tasks, it was possible to find individuals 
who could carry out either one of the tasks but not the other. Thus, even before 
formal instruction, arithmetical cognition is not unitary but is made up of many 
components.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00713.x
PMID: 18801119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1009. Dev Sci. 2008 Jul;11(4):620-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00706.x.

Fitting the child's mind to the world: adaptive norm-based coding of facial 
identity in 8-year-olds.

Nishimura M(1), Maurer D, Jeffery L, Pellicano E, Rhodes G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Neuroscience & Behaviour, McMaster University, 
Canada.

In adults, facial identity is coded by opponent processes relative to an average 
face or norm, as evidenced by the face identity aftereffect: adapting to a face 
biases perception towards the opposite identity, so that a previously neutral 
face (e.g. the average) resembles the identity of the computationally opposite 
face. We investigated whether children as young as 8 use adaptive norm-based 
coding to represent faces, a question of interest because 8-year-olds are less 
accurate than adults at recognizing faces and do not show the adult neural 
markers of face expertise. We found comparable face identity aftereffects in 
8-year-olds and adults: perception of identity in both groups shifted in the 
direction predicted by norm-based coding. This finding suggests that, by 8 years 
of age, the adaptive computational mechanisms used to code facial identity are 
like those of adults and hence that children's immaturities in face processing 
arise from another source.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00706.x
PMID: 18576969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1010. Dev Sci. 2008 Jul;11(4):596-606. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00704.x.

Developmental changes in the weighting of prosodic cues.

Seidl A(1), Cristià A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Speech, Language and Hearing Sciences, Purdue University, W. 
Lafayette, IN 47907, USA. aseidl@purdue.edu

Previous research has shown that the weighting of, or attention to, acoustic 
cues at the level of the segment changes over the course of development 
(Nittrouer & Miller, 1997; Nittrouer, Manning & Meyer, 1993). In this paper we 
examined changes over the course of development in weighting of acoustic cues at 
the suprasegmental level. Specifically, we tested English-learning 4-month-olds' 
performance on a clause segmentation task when each of three acoustic cues to 
clausal units was neutralized and contrasted it with performance on a Baseline 
condition where no cues were manipulated. Comparison with the reported 
performance of 6-month-olds on the same task (Seidl, 2007) reveals that 
4-month-olds weight prosodic cues to clausal boundaries differently than 
6-month-olds, relying more heavily on all three correlates of clausal boundaries 
(pause, pitch and vowel duration) than 6-month-olds do, who rely primarily on 
pitch. We interpret this as evidence that 4-month-olds use a holistic processing 
strategy, while 6-month-olds may already be able to attend separately to 
isolated cues in the input stream and may, furthermore, be able to exploit a 
language-specific cue weighting. Thus, in a way similar to that in other 
cognitive domains, infants begin as holistic auditory scene processors and are 
only later able to process individual auditory cues.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00704.x
PMID: 18576967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1011. Dev Sci. 2008 Jul;11(4):583-95. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00662.x.

Developmental trajectories for spatial frames of reference in Williams syndrome.

Nardini M(1), Atkinson J, Braddick O, Burgess N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University College London, UK. m.nardini@ucl.ac.uk

Williams syndrome (WS) is a genetic disorder associated with severe 
visuocognitive impairment. Individuals with WS also report difficulties with 
everyday wayfinding. To study the development of body-, environment-, and 
object-based spatial frames of reference in WS, we tested 45 children and adults 
with WS on a search task in which the participant and a spatial array are moved 
with respect to each other. Although individuals with WS showed a marked delay, 
like young controls they demonstrated independent, additive use of body- and 
environment-based frames of reference. Crucially, object-based (intrinsic) 
representations based on local landmarks within the array were only marginally 
used even by adults with WS, whereas in typical development these emerge at 5 
years. Deficits in landmark use are consistent with wayfinding difficulties in 
WS, and may also contribute to problems with basic localization, since in 
typical development landmark-based representations supplement those based on the 
body and on self-motion. Difficulties with inhibition or mental rotation may be 
further components in the impaired ability to use the correct reference frame in 
WS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00662.x
PMID: 18576966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1012. Dev Sci. 2008 Jul;11(4):541-55. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00700.x.

Generality with specificity: the dynamic field theory generalizes across tasks 
and time scales.

Simmering VR(1), Spencer JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA. 
vanessa-simmering@uiowa.edu

A central goal in cognitive and developmental science is to develop models of 
behavior that can generalize across both tasks and development while maintaining 
a commitment to detailed behavioral prediction. This paper presents tests of one 
such model, the Dynamic Field Theory (DFT). The DFT was originally proposed to 
capture delay-dependent biases in spatial recall and developmental changes in 
spatial recall performance. More recently, the theory was generalized to adults' 
performance in a second spatial working memory task, position discrimination. 
Here we use the theory to predict a specific, complex developmental pattern in 
position discrimination. Data with 3- to 6-year-old children and adults confirm 
these predictions, demonstrating that the DFT achieves generality across tasks 
and time scales, as well as the specificity necessary to generate novel, 
falsifiable predictions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00700.x
PMCID: PMC2593101
PMID: 18576962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1013. Dev Sci. 2008 Jul;11(4):531-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00699.x.

The referential communication skills of children with imaginary companions.

Roby AC(1), Kidd E.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychological Sciences, The University of Manchester, UK.

The present study investigated the referential communication skills of children 
with imaginary companions (ICs). Twenty-two children with ICs aged between 4 and 
6 years were compared to 22 children without ICs (NICs). The children were 
matched for age, gender, birth order, number of siblings, and parental 
education. All children completed the Test of Referential Communication 
(Camaioni, Ercolani & Lloyd, 1995). The results showed that the children with 
ICs performed better than the children without ICs on the speaker component of 
the task. In particular, the IC children were better able to identify a specific 
referent to their interlocutor than were the NIC children. Furthermore, the IC 
children described less redundant features of the target picture than did the 
NIC children. The children did not differ in the listening comprehension 
component of the task. Overall, the results suggest that the IC children had a 
better understanding of their interlocutor's information requirements in 
conversation. The role of pretend play in the development of communicative 
competence is discussed in light of these results.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00699.x
PMID: 18576961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1014. Dev Sci. 2008 Jul;11(4):525-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00698.x.

Move it! Visual feedback enhances validity of preferential looking as a measure 
of individual differences in vocabulary in toddlers.

Killing SE(1), Bishop DV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, UK.

Forty toddlers aged 20 to 24 months were presented with 32 pairs of images with 
the auditory stimulus Look followed by the name of the target image (e.g. Look . 
. . tree) in an intermodal preferential looking (IPL) paradigm. The same series 
of 16 items was presented first with one image as target and then with the other 
member of the pair as target. Half the children were given feedback, in the form 
of movement of the target image at the end of the trial, while the other half 
were presented with static images. IPL performance was quantified in terms of 
number of words showing at least 15% increase in proportion of looking time in 
the post-naming interval. Looking preference for the named item was correlated 
with parental report of vocabulary, this effect being stronger for those 
receiving feedback. The correlation with parental report of vocabulary 
comprehension was .65 for those receiving feedback, but only .37 for those with 
no feedback. It is concluded that the preferential looking task, which has been 
widely used in group studies, has the potential to act as a reliable index of 
comprehension level in individual children, especially when movement feedback is 
used to maintain attention.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00698.x
PMID: 18576960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1015. Dev Sci. 2008 Jul;11(4):516-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00697.x.

Do children with autism 'switch off' to speech sounds? An investigation using 
event-related potentials.

Whitehouse AJ(1), Bishop DV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, Oxford University, UK.

Autism is a disorder characterized by a core impairment in social behaviour. A 
prominent component of this social deficit is poor orienting to speech. It is 
unclear whether this deficit involves an impairment in allocating attention to 
speech sounds, or a sensory impairment in processing phonetic information. In 
this study, event-related potentials of 15 children with high functioning autism 
(mean nonverbal IQ = 109.87) and 15 typically developing children (mean 
nonverbal IQ = 115.73) were recorded in response to sounds in two oddball 
conditions. Participants heard two stimulus types: vowels and complex tones. In 
each condition, repetitive 'standard' sounds (condition 1: vowel; condition 2: 
complex tone) were replaced by a within stimulus-type 'deviant' sound and a 
between stimulus-type 'novel' sound. Participants' level of attention was also 
varied between conditions. Children with autism had significantly diminished 
obligatory components in response to the repetitive speech sound, but not to the 
repetitive nonspeech sound. This difference disappeared when participants were 
required to allocate attention to the sound stream. Furthermore, the children 
with autism showed reduced orienting to novel tones presented in a sequence of 
speech sounds, but not to novel speech sounds presented in a sequence of tones. 
These findings indicate that high functioning children with autism can allocate 
attention to novel speech sounds. However, they use top-down inhibition to 
attenuate responses to repeated streams of speech. This suggests that problems 
with speech processing in this population involve efferent pathways.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00697.x
PMID: 18576959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1016. Dev Sci. 2008 Jul;11(4):495-503. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00695.x.

Lying in the name of the collective good: a developmental study.

Fu G(1), Evans AD, Wang L, Lee K.

Author information:
(1)School of Education, Zhejiang Normal University, P.R. China.

The present study examined the developmental origin of 'blue lies', a pervasive 
form of lying in the adult world that is told purportedly to benefit a 
collective. Seven, 9-, and 11-year-old Chinese children were surreptitiously 
placed in a real-life situation where they decided whether to lie to conceal 
their group's cheating behavior. Children were also assessed in terms of their 
willingness in hypothetical situations to endorse lying or truth-telling that 
benefits a collective but at the same time harms an individual. Results showed 
that as age increased, children became more inclined to endorse lying in the 
name of the collective good, and to tell lies for their group themselves. 
Furthermore, children's endorsement about blue lies in hypothetical situations 
predicted their actual lying behavior.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00695.x
PMCID: PMC2570108
PMID: 18576957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1017. Dev Sci. 2008 Jul;11(4):487-94. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00694.x.

Do as I do: 7-month-old infants selectively reproduce others' goals.

Hamlin JK(1), Hallinan EV, Woodward AL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, USA. kiley.hamlin@yale.edu

In the current study, we tested whether 7-month-old infants would selectively 
imitate the goal-relevant aspects of an observed action. Infants saw an 
experimenter perform an action on one of two small toys and then were given the 
opportunity to act on the toys. Infants viewed actions that were either 
goal-directed or goal-ambiguous, and that represented either completed or 
uncompleted goals. Infants reproduced the goal of the experimenter only in those 
cases where the action was goal-directed, in both the complete and incomplete 
goal conditions. These results provide the first evidence that infants as young 
as 7 months of age selectively imitate actions based on their goal-directedness, 
and that they are able to analyze the goals of even uncompleted actions. Even 
during the first year of life, infants' sensitivity to goal-directed action is 
expressed not only in their responses in visual habituation procedures, but also 
in their overt actions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00694.x
PMCID: PMC6002751
PMID: 18576956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1018. Dev Sci. 2008 Mar;11(2):321-37. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00678.x.

Atypical neural functions underlying phonological processing and silent 
rehearsal in children who stutter.

Weber-Fox C(1), Spruill JE 3rd, Spencer R, Smith A.

Author information:
(1)Speech, Language, & Hearing Sciences, Purdue University, USA. 
weberfox@purdue.edu

Phonological processing was examined in school-age children who stutter (CWS) by 
assessing their performance and recording event-related brain potentials (ERPs) 
in a visual rhyming task. CWS had lower accuracy on rhyming judgments, but the 
cognitive processes that mediate the comparisons of the phonological 
representations of words, as indexed by the rhyming effect (RE) ERP, were 
similar for the stuttering and normally fluent groups. Thus the lower behavioral 
accuracy of rhyming judgments by the CWS could not be attributed to that 
particular stage of processing. Instead, the neural functions for processes 
preceding the RE, indexed by the N400 and CNV elicited by the primes and the 
N400 elicited by the targets, suggest atypical processing that may have resulted 
in less efficient, less accurate rhyming judgment for the CWS. Based on the 
present results, it seems likely that the neural processes related to 
phonological rehearsal and target word anticipation, as indexed by the CNV, are 
distinctive for CWS at this age. Further, it is likely that the relative 
contributions of the left and right hemispheres differ in CWS in the stage of 
processing when linguistic integration occurs, as indexed by the N400. Taken 
together, these results suggest that CWS may be less able to form and retain a 
stable neural representation of the prime onset and rime as they anticipate the 
target presentation, which may lead to lower rhyming judgment accuracy.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00678.x
PMCID: PMC2673811
PMID: 18333985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1019. Dev Sci. 2008 Mar;11(2):306-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00677.x.

Impact of language on development of auditory-visual speech perception.

Sekiyama K(1), Burnham D.

Author information:
(1)School of Systems Information Science, Future University, Hakodate, Japan. 
sekiyama@kumamoto-u.ac.jp

The McGurk effect paradigm was used to examine the developmental onset of 
inter-language differences between Japanese and English in auditory-visual 
speech perception. Participants were asked to identify syllables in audiovisual 
(with congruent or discrepant auditory and visual components), audio-only, and 
video-only presentations at various signal-to-noise levels. In Experiment 1 with 
two groups of adults, native speakers of Japanese and native speakers of 
English, the results on both percent visually influenced responses and reaction 
time supported previous reports of a weaker visual influence for Japanese 
participants. In Experiment 2, an additional three age groups (6, 8, and 11 
years) in each language group were tested. The results showed that the degree of 
visual influence was low and equivalent for Japanese and English language 
6-year-olds, and increased over age for English language participants, 
especially between 6 and 8 years, but remained the same for Japanese 
participants. This may be related to the fact that English language adults and 
older children processed visual speech information relatively faster than 
auditory information whereas no such inter-modal differences were found in the 
Japanese participants' reaction times.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00677.x
PMID: 18333984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1020. Dev Sci. 2008 Mar;11(2):282-98. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00675.x.

Bilingual experience and executive functioning in young children.

Carlson SM(1), Meltzoff AN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Washington, USA.

Advanced inhibitory control skills have been found in bilingual speakers as 
compared to monolingual controls (Bialystok, 1999). We examined whether this 
effect is generalized to an unstudied language group (Spanish-English bilingual) 
and multiple measures of executive function by administering a battery of tasks 
to 50 kindergarten children drawn from three language groups: native bilinguals, 
monolinguals (English), and English speakers enrolled in second-language 
immersion kindergarten. Despite having significantly lower verbal scores and 
parent education/income level, Spanish-English bilingual children's raw scores 
did not differ from their peers. After statistically controlling for these 
factors and age, native bilingual children performed significantly better on the 
executive function battery than both other groups. Importantly, the relative 
advantage was significant for tasks that appear to call for managing conflicting 
attentional demands (Conflict tasks); there was no advantage on impulse-control 
(Delay tasks). These results advance our understanding of both the 
generalizability and specificity of the compensatory effects of bilingual 
experience for children's cognitive development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00675.x
PMCID: PMC3647884
PMID: 18333982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1021. Dev Sci. 2008 Mar;11(2):223-36. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00673.x.

Verbal self-instructions in task switching: a compensatory tool for 
action-control deficits in childhood and old age?

Kray J(1), Eber J, Karbach J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany. 
j.kray@mx.uni-saarland.de

This study examined the influence of verbal self-instructions on age differences 
in task switching. Task-switching ability, measured as the difference between 
performance in single-task blocks and in mixed-task blocks in which participants 
switch between two tasks (mixing costs), increases during childhood and 
decreases in old age. To measure the influence of language on task switching, we 
compared conditions in which participants either (a) named the next task to be 
performed (i.e. task-relevant verbalization), (b) verbalized words not related 
to the task at hand (i.e. task-irrelevant verbalization), or (c) did not 
verbalize (control condition). Results indicated that mixing costs were 
substantially reduced under task-relevant verbalization and increased under 
task-irrelevant verbalization. Moreover, age-related differences in mixing costs 
were increased when the use of inner speech was disrupted and were reduced when 
participants performed task-relevant verbalization. These findings suggest that 
verbal self-instructions are a useful tool for retrieving the next task goal and 
for reducing action-control deficits in younger children and older adults.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00673.x
PMID: 18333979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1022. Dev Sci. 2008 Mar;11(2):204-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00666.x.

The shape of thought.

Markson L(1), Diesendruck G, Bloom P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. 
markson@berkeley.edu

When children learn the name of a novel object, they tend to extend that name to 
other objects similar in shape - a phenomenon referred to as the shape bias. 
Does the shape bias stem from learned associations between names and categories 
of objects, or does it derive from more general properties of children's 
understanding of language and the world? We argue here for the second 
alternative, presenting evidence that the shape bias emerges early in 
development, is not limited to names, and is intimately related to how children 
make sense of categories.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00666.x
PMID: 18333975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1023. Dev Sci. 2008 Mar;11(2):195-203. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00665.x.

Knowledge embedded in process: the self-organization of skilled noun learning.

Colunga E(1), Smith LB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA. 
colunga@colorado.edu

Young children's skilled generalization of newly learned nouns to new instances 
has become the battleground for two very different approaches to cognition. This 
debate is a proxy for a larger dispute in cognitive science and cognitive 
development: cognition as rule-like amodal propositions, on the one hand, or as 
embodied, modal, and dynamic processes on the other. After a brief consideration 
of this theoretical backdrop, we turn to the specific task set before us: an 
overview of the Attentional Learning Account (ALA) of children's novel noun 
generalizations, the constrained set of experimental results to be explained, 
and our explanation of them. We conclude with a consideration of what all of 
this implies for a theory of cognitive development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00665.x
PMID: 18333974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1024. Dev Sci. 2008 Jan;11(1):156-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00660.x.

Developmental changes in children's understanding of the similarity between 
photographs and their referents.

Uttal DH(1), Gentner D, Liu LL, Lewis AR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208-2710, 
USA. duttal@northwestern.edu

In a series of three experiments, we investigated the development of children's 
understanding of the similarities between photographs and their referents. Based 
on prior work on the development of analogical understanding (e.g. Gentner & 
Rattermann, 1991), we suggest that the appreciation of this relation involves 
multiple levels. Photographs are similar to their referents both in terms of the 
constituent objects and in terms of the relations among these objects. We 
predicted that children would appreciate object similarity (whether photographs 
depict the same objects as in the referent scene) before they would appreciate 
relational similarity (whether photographs depict the objects in the same 
spatial positions as in the referent scene). To test this hypothesis, we 
presented 3-, 4-, 5-, 6-, and 7-year-old children and adults with several 
candidate photographs of an arrangement of objects. Participants were asked to 
choose which of the photographs was 'the same' as the arrangement. We 
manipulated the types of information the photographs preserved about the 
referent objects. One set of photographs did not preserve the object properties 
of the scene. Another set of photographs preserved the object properties of the 
scene, but not the relational similarity, such that the original objects were 
depicted but occupied different spatial positions in the arrangement. As 
predicted, younger children based their choices of the photographs largely on 
object similarity, whereas older children and adults also took relational 
similarity into account. Results are discussed in terms of the development of 
children's appreciation of different levels of similarity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00660.x
PMID: 18171376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1025. Dev Sci. 2008 Jan;11(1):98-108. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00658.x.

Development of using experimenter-given cues in infant chimpanzees: longitudinal 
changes in behavior and cognitive development.

Okamoto-Barth S(1), Tomonaga M, Tanaka M, Matsuzawa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Graduate School of Environmental Studies, Nagoya 
University, Japan. s.barth@psychology.unimaas.nl

The use of gaze shifts as social cues has various evolutionary advantages. To 
investigate the developmental processes of this ability, we conducted an 
object-choice task by using longitudinal methods with infant chimpanzees tested 
from 8 months old until 3 years old. The experimenter used one of six gestures 
towards a cup concealing food; tapping, touching, whole-hand pointing, gazing 
plus close-pointing, distant-pointing, close-gazing, and distant-gazing. Unlike 
any other previous study, we analyzed the behavioral changes that occurred 
before and after choosing the cup. We assumed that pre-choice behavior indicates 
the development of an attentional and spatial connection between a pointing cue 
and an object (e.g. Woodward, 2005); and post-choice behavior indicates the 
emergence of object permanence (e.g. Piaget, 1954). Our study demonstrated that 
infant chimpanzees begin to use experimenter-given cues with age (after 11 
months of age). Moreover, the results from the behavioral analysis showed that 
the infants gradually developed the spatial link between the pointing as an 
object-directed action and the object. Moreover, when they were 11 months old, 
the infants began to inspect the inside of the cup, suggesting the onset of 
object permanence. Overall, our results imply that the ability to use the cues 
is developing and mutually related with other cognitive developments. The 
present study also suggests what the standard object-choice task actually 
measures by breaking the task down into the developmental trajectories of its 
component parts, and describes for the first time the social-physical cognitive 
development during the task with a longitudinal method.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00658.x
PMID: 18171372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1026. Dev Sci. 2008 Jan;11(1):40-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00608.x.

Altered face scanning and impaired recognition of biological motion in a 
15-month-old infant with autism.

Klin A(1), Jones W.

Author information:
(1)Yale Child Study Center, Yale University School of Medicine, USA.

Mounting clinical evidence suggests that abnormalities of social engagement in 
children with autism are present even during infancy. However, direct 
experimental documentation of these abnormalities is still limited. In this case 
report of a 15-month-old infant with autism, we measured visual fixation 
patterns to both naturalistic and ambiguous social stimuli: video scenes of a 
caregiver and point-light animations of human action. Results suggested that 
viewing patterns of the child with autism were driven by the physical 
contingencies of the stimuli rather than by their social context. If 
corroborated in larger studies, this observation would advance the hypothesis 
that mechanisms of social development which rely on preferential engagement with 
socially contingent conspecifics - and which emerge in the very first weeks of 
life in typical infants - are developmentally derailed in children with autism.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00608.x
PMID: 18171365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1027. Dev Sci. 2007 Nov;10(6):910-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00641.x.

Age-related changes in deferred imitation from television by 6- to 
18-month-olds.

Barr R(1), Muentener P, Garcia A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA. 
rfb5@georgetown.edu

During the second year of life, infants exhibit a video deficit effect. That is, 
they learn significantly less from a televised demonstration than they learn 
from a live demonstration. We predicted that repeated exposure to televised 
demonstrations would increase imitation from television, thereby reducing the 
video deficit effect. Independent groups of 6- to 18-month-olds were exposed to 
live or videotaped demonstrations of target actions. Imitation of the target 
actions was measured 24 hours later. The video segment duration was twice that 
of the live presentation. Doubling exposure ameliorated the video deficit effect 
for 12-month-olds but not for 15- and 18-month-olds. The 6-month-olds imitated 
from television but did not demonstrate a video deficit effect at all, learning 
equally well from a live and video demonstration. Findings are discussed in 
terms of the perceptual impoverishment theory and the dual representation 
theory.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00641.x
PMID: 17973804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1028. Dev Sci. 2007 Nov;10(6):853-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00638.x.

Linking working memory and long-term memory: a computational model of the 
learning of new words.

Jones G(1), Gobet F, Pine JM.

Author information:
(1)Psychology Department, Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham, UK. 
gary.jones@ntu.ac.uk

The nonword repetition (NWR) test has been shown to be a good predictor of 
children's vocabulary size. NWR performance has been explained using 
phonological working memory, which is seen as a critical component in the 
learning of new words. However, no detailed specification of the link between 
phonological working memory and long-term memory (LTM) has been proposed. In 
this paper, we present a computational model of children's vocabulary 
acquisition (EPAM-VOC) that specifies how phonological working memory and LTM 
interact. The model learns phoneme sequences, which are stored in LTM and 
mediate how much information can be held in working memory. The model's 
behaviour is compared with that of children in a new study of NWR, conducted in 
order to ensure the same nonword stimuli and methodology across ages. EPAM-VOC 
shows a pattern of results similar to that of children: performance is better 
for shorter nonwords and for wordlike nonwords, and performance improves with 
age. EPAM-VOC also simulates the superior performance for single consonant 
nonwords over clustered consonant nonwords found in previous NWR studies. 
EPAM-VOC provides a simple and elegant computational account of some of the key 
processes involved in the learning of new words: it specifies how phonological 
working memory and LTM interact; makes testable predictions; and suggests that 
developmental changes in NWR performance may reflect differences in the amount 
of information that has been encoded in LTM rather than developmental changes in 
working memory capacity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00638.x
PMID: 17973801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1029. Dev Sci. 2007 Nov;10(6):763-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00625.x.

Young children's use of scale models: testing an alternative to representational 
insight.

Troseth GL(1), Bloom Pickard ME, DeLoache JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Human Development, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, Tennessee 37203-5701, USA. georgene.troseth@vanderbilt.edu

Using a symbolic object such as a model as a source of information about 
something else requires some appreciation of the relation between the symbol and 
what it represents. Representational insight has been proposed as essential to 
success in a symbolic retrieval task in which children must use information from 
a hiding event in a scale model to find a toy hidden in a room. The two studies 
reported here examine and reject a proposed alternative account for success in 
the model task. The results with 2.5-year-olds and 3-year-olds show that 
children's successful use of a scale model cannot be attributed to the simple 
detection of the correspondences between the objects in the two spaces. A 
higher-level representation of the model-room relation (i.e. representational 
insight) is required. The results are discussed with respect to the coalescence 
of multiple factors in determining performance in the model task.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00625.x
PMID: 17973793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1030. Dev Sci. 2007 Nov;10(6):755-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00626.x.

Nature and nurture: Williams syndrome across cultures.

Zitzer-Comfort C(1), Doyle T, Masataka N, Korenberg J, Bellugi U.

Author information:
(1)Department of English, California State University, Long Beach, CA 90840, 
USA. ccomfort@csulb.edu

This study is concerned with ways in which children with Williams syndrome (WS), 
a rare neurodevelopmental disorder arising from a hemizygous deletion in 
chromosome band 7q11.23 including the gene for elastin (ELN) and approximately 
20 surrounding genes, are affected by social mores of vastly differing cultures: 
the United States and Japan. WS presents a compelling model for the 
investigation because its genetic phenotype is well defined and results in an 
uneven cognitive profile as well as a social phenotype typical of the syndrome 
including overt over-friendliness toward strangers. While a number of research 
groups have been studying the cognitive strengths and weaknesses of individuals 
with WS in various countries, there have not been studies to date that explore 
the social phenotype in WS across different cultures. This study examines the 
ways in which social behavior in WS, stemming from specific genetic 
underpinnings, might be mediated by cultural expectations. We conducted a 
cross-cultural study using an instrument that measures aspects of sociability 
commonly found among people with WS. Quantitative analyses revealed a 
significant effect of diagnostic category in that in both countries, children 
with WS were rated as significantly higher in global sociability and more likely 
to approach strangers than were their normal counterparts. There was also an 
effect of culture, in that regardless of category, WS and normal children in 
Japan were rated lower than their counterparts in the US. We suggest that the 
excessively social phenotype of children with Williams syndrome, although 
markedly present across cultures, appears to vary in its intensity by culture. 
This is an intriguing illustration of interactions between nature and nurture.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00626.x
PMID: 17973792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1031. Dev Sci. 2007 Nov;10(6):713-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00649.x.

Biased to learn language.

Sebastián-Gallés N(1).

Author information:
(1)GRNC, Parc Científic de Barcelona and Departament de Psicologia Bàsica, 
Universitat de Barcelona, Spain. nsebastian@ub.edu

Some recent publications that explore the foundations of early language 
development are reviewed in this article. The review adopts the pivotal idea 
that infants' advancements are helped by the existence of different types of 
biases. The infant's discovery of the phonological properties of the language of 
the environment, as well as their learning of words, is assisted by different 
types of processing biases, ranging from perceptual to social factors.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00649.x
PMID: 17973786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1032. Dev Sci. 2007 Jul;10(4):452-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00599.x.

Evidence of a shift from featural to configural face processing in infancy.

Schwarzer G(1), Zauner N, Jovanovic B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Giessen, Otto-Behaghel-Strasse 11, 
35394 Giessen, Germany. gudrun.schwarzer@psychol.uni-giessen.de

Two experiments examined whether 4-, 6-, and 10-month-old infants process 
natural looking faces by feature, i.e. processing internal facial features 
independently of the facial context or holistically by processing the features 
in conjunction with the facial context. Infants were habituated to two faces and 
looking time was measured. After habituation they were tested with a habituation 
face, a switch-face, or a novel face. In the switch-faces, the eyes and mouth of 
the habituation faces were switched. The results showed that the 4-month-olds 
processed eyes and mouth by feature, whereas the 10-month-olds processed both 
features holistically. The 6-month-olds were in a transitional stage where they 
processed the mouth holistically but the eyes still as a feature. Thus, the 
results demonstrated a shift from featural to holistic processing in the age 
range of 4 to 10 months.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00599.x
PMID: 17552935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1033. Dev Sci. 2007 Jul;10(4):441-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00598.x.

Neural correlates of mapping from phonology to orthography in children 
performing an auditory spelling task.

Booth JR(1), Cho S, Burman DD, Bitan T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northwestern University, 
2240 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208, USA. j-booth@northwestern.edu

Age-related differences (9- to 15-year-olds) in the neural correlates of mapping 
from phonology to orthography were examined with functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI). Participants were asked to determine if two spoken words had the 
same spelling for the rime (corresponding letters after the first consonant or 
consonant cluster). Some of the word pairs had conflicting orthography and 
phonology (e.g. jazz-has, pint-mint) whereas other pairs had non-conflicting 
information (e.g. press-list, gate-hate) (see Table 1). There were age-related 
increases in activation for lexical processing (across conflicting and 
non-conflicting conditions) in left inferior parietal lobule, suggesting that 
older children have a more elaborated system for mapping between phonology and 
orthography that includes connections at different grain sizes (e.g. phonemes, 
onset-rimes, syllables). In addition, we found that the conflicting conditions 
had lower accuracy, slower reaction time and greater activation in left inferior 
frontal gyrus as compared to non-conflicting conditions. Higher accuracy was 
also correlated with greater activation in left inferior frontal gyrus for the 
most difficult conflicting condition (e.g. jazz-has). The finding of both a 
conflict effect and a correlation with accuracy in left inferior frontal gyrus 
suggests that this region may be involved in resolving the conflict between 
orthographic and phonological representations.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00598.x
PMCID: PMC2638504
PMID: 17552934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1034. Dev Sci. 2007 May;10(3):357-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00588.x.

The Bayesian revolution approaches psychological development.

Shultz TR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 
Thomas.shultz@mcgill.ca

This commentary reviews five articles that apply Bayesian ideas to psychological 
development, some with psychology experiments, some with computational modeling, 
and some with both experiments and modeling. The reviewed work extends the 
current Bayesian revolution into tasks often studied in children, such as causal 
learning and word learning, and provides evidence that children's performance 
can be optimal in a Bayesian sense. There remains much to be done in terms of 
understanding how representations are created, how development occurs, how 
Bayesian computation might be neurally implemented, and in reconciling the new 
work with older evidence that even skilled adults are incompetent Bayesians.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00588.x
PMID: 17444975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1035. Dev Sci. 2007 May;10(3):322-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00587.x.

Preschool children learn about causal structure from conditional interventions.

Schulz LE(1), Gopnik A, Glymour C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. lschulz@mit.edu

The conditional intervention principle is a formal principle that relates 
patterns of interventions and outcomes to causal structure. It is a central 
assumption of experimental design and the causal Bayes net formalism. Two 
studies suggest that preschoolers can use the conditional intervention principle 
to distinguish causal chains, common cause and interactive causal structures 
even in the absence of differential spatiotemporal cues and specific mechanism 
knowledge. Children were also able to use knowledge of causal structure to 
predict the patterns of evidence that would result from interventions. A third 
study suggests that children's spontaneous play can generate evidence that would 
support such accurate causal learning.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00587.x
PMID: 17444973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1036. Dev Sci. 2007 Mar;10(2):F8-F14. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00579.x.

Risk-taking and the adolescent brain: who is at risk?

Galvan A(1), Hare T, Voss H, Glover G, Casey BJ.

Author information:
(1)Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Medical College of 
Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Relative to other ages, adolescence is described as a period of increased 
impulsive and risk-taking behavior that can lead to fatal outcomes (suicide, 
substance abuse, HIV, accidents, etc.). This study was designed to examine 
neural correlates of risk-taking behavior in adolescents, relative to children 
and adults, in order to predict who may be at greatest risk. Activity in 
reward-related neural circuitry in anticipation of a large monetary reward was 
measured with functional magnetic resonance imaging, and anonymous self-report 
ratings of risky behavior, anticipation of risk and impulsivity were acquired in 
individuals between the ages of 7 and 29 years. There was a positive association 
between accumbens activity and the likelihood of engaging in risky behavior 
across development. This activity also varied as a function of individuals' 
ratings of anticipated positive or negative consequences of such behavior. 
Impulsivity ratings were not associated with accumbens activity, but rather with 
age. These findings suggest that during adolescence, some individuals may be 
especially prone to engage in risky behaviors due to developmental changes in 
concert with variability in a given individual's predisposition to engage in 
risky behavior, rather than to simple changes in impulsivity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00579.x
PMID: 17286837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1037. Dev Sci. 2007 Mar;10(2):F1-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00552.x.

Pointing out new news, old news, and absent referents at 12 months of age.

Liszkowski U(1), Carpenter M, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Department of 
Developmental and Comparative Psychology, Leipzig, Germany. 
liszkowski@eva.mpg.de

There is currently controversy over the nature of 1-year-olds' social-cognitive 
understanding and motives. In this study we investigated whether 12-month-old 
infants point for others with an understanding of their knowledge states and 
with a prosocial motive for sharing experiences with them. Declarative pointing 
was elicited in four conditions created by crossing two factors: an adult 
partner (1) was already attending to the target event or not, and (2) emoted 
positively or neutrally. Pointing was also coded after the event had ceased. The 
findings suggest that 12-month-olds point to inform others of events they do not 
know about, that they point to share an attitude about mutually attended events 
others already know about, and that they can point (already prelinguistically) 
to absent referents. These findings provide strong support for a mentalistic and 
prosocial interpretation of infants' prelinguistic communication.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00552.x
PMID: 17286836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1038. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):135-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00575.x.

Trust.

Harris PL(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Education, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. 
harrispa@gse.harvard.edu

Children rely extensively on others' testimony to learn about the world. 
However, they are not uniformly credulous toward other people. From an early 
age, children's reliance on testimony is tempered by selective trust in 
particular informants. Three- and 4-year-olds monitor the accuracy or knowledge 
of informants, including those that are familiar. They prefer to seek and 
endorse information provided by someone who has proved accurate in the past 
rather than someone who has made mistakes or acknowledged ignorance. Future 
research is likely to pinpoint other heuristics that children use to filter 
incoming testimony and may reveal more generalized patterns of trust and 
mistrust among individual children.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00575.x
PMID: 17181711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1039. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):110-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00572.x.

Is speech learning 'gated' by the social brain?

Kuhl PK(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA 98195, USA. pkkuhl@u.washington.edu

I advance the hypothesis that the earliest phases of language acquisition -- the 
developmental transition from an initial universal state of language processing 
to one that is language-specific -- requires social interaction. Relating human 
language learning to a broader set of neurobiological cases of communicative 
development, I argue that the social brain 'gates' the computational mechanisms 
involved in human language learning.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00572.x
PMID: 17181708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1040. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):84-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00568.x.

Atypical epigenesis.

Karmiloff-Smith A(1).

Author information:
(1)Developmental Neurocognition Lab, Birkbeck, University of London, London, UK. 
a.karmiloff-smith@bbk.ac.uk

It is becoming increasingly clear that little in development is predetermined or 
permanently fixed. Rather, gene expression is activity dependent, and epigenesis 
is probabilistic. So, the study of genetic disorders needs to change from the 
still widely held view that developmental disorders can be accounted for in 
terms of intact versus impaired modules, to one which takes serious account of 
the fact that the infant cortex passes from an initial state of high regional 
interconnectivity to a subsequent state of increasing specialization and 
localization of function. With such early interconnectivity in mind, 
developmental neuroscientists must consider the possibility that an early 
deficit in one part of the brain may have subtle effects on other parts of the 
developing brain, even when scores fall 'in the normal range'. In studying 
developmental disorders, it is thus crucial to examine not only domains of 
clear-cut deficit, but also domains of behavioural proficiency. Atypical 
epigenesis may often involve a lack of specialization and localization of brain 
function over developmental time, even in cases of behavioural proficiency.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00568.x
PMID: 17181704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1041. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):75-83. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00567.x.

Neuroconstructivism.

Westermann G(1), Mareschal D, Johnson MH, Sirois S, Spratling MW, Thomas MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, UK. 
gwestermann@brookes.ac.uk

Neuroconstructivism is a theoretical framework focusing on the construction of 
representations in the developing brain. Cognitive development is explained as 
emerging from the experience-dependent development of neural structures 
supporting mental representations. Neural development occurs in the context of 
multiple interacting constraints acting on different levels, from the individual 
cell to the external environment of the developing child. Cognitive development 
can thus be understood as a trajectory originating from the constraints on the 
underlying neural structures. This perspective offers an integrated view of 
normal and abnormal development as well as of development and adult processing, 
and it stands apart from traditional cognitive approaches in taking seriously 
the constraints on cognition inherent to the substrate that delivers it.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00567.x
PMID: 17181703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1042. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):40-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00562.x.

Sleeper effects.

Maurer D(1), Mondloch CJ, Lewis TL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Neuroscience & Behaviour, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada. maurer@mcmaster.ca

Early experience preserves and refines many capabilities that emerge prenatally. 
Here we describe another role that it plays -- establishing the neural substrate 
for capabilities that emerge at a much later point in development. The evidence 
comes from sleeper effects: permanent deficits when early experience was absent 
in capabilities that normally emerge long after birth. We provide evidence of 
sleeper effects for three aspects of vision, based on our research with children 
who were deprived of early visual input by congenital cataracts: contrast 
sensitivity for mid and high spatial frequencies, holistic face processing, and 
the ability to recognize the identity of faces based on small differences in the 
spacing among facial features.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00562.x
PMID: 17181698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1043. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):35-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00561.x.

Music, evolution and language.

Masataka N(1).

Author information:
(1)Japan Science Technology Agency, Saitama, Japan. masataka@pri.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Darwin (1871) noted that the human musical faculty 'must be ranked amongst the 
most mysterious with which he is endowed'. Indeed, previous research with human 
infants and young children has revealed that we are born with variable musical 
capabilities. Here, the adaptive purpose served by these differing capabilities 
is discussed with reference to comparative findings regarding the acoustic 
behavior of nonhuman primates. The findings provide evidence supporting Darwin's 
hypothesis of an intermediate stage of human evolutionary history characterized 
by a communication system that resembles music more closely than language and 
possibly acting as a precursor for both current language and music.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00561.x
PMID: 17181697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1044. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):12-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00557.x.

Gene-environment interdependence.

Rutter M(1).

Author information:
(1)Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, 
London, UK. j.wickham@iop.kcl.ac.uk

Behavioural genetics was initially concerned with partitioning population 
variance into that due to genetics and that due to environmental influences. The 
implication was that the two were separate and it was assumed that 
gene-environment interactions were usually of so little importance that they 
could safely be ignored. Theoretical considerations suggested that that was 
unlikely to be true and empirical findings are now accumulating on the 
demonstrated and replicated biological interactions between identified common 
single genetic variants and the operation of environmentally mediated risks. The 
paper outlines the evidence and considers why it is changing concepts in ways 
that matter.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00557.x
PMID: 17181693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1045. Dev Sci. 2006 Nov;9(6):590-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00537.x.

Young children's understanding of multiple object identity: appearance, pretense 
and function.

Abelev M(1), Markman E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. 
mabelev@uchicago.edu

Evidence from theory-of-mind tasks suggests that young children have substantial 
difficulty thinking about multiple object identity and multiple versions of 
reality. On the other hand, evidence from children's understanding of pretense 
indicates that children have little trouble understanding dual object identity 
and counterfactual scenarios that are involved in pretend play. Two studies 
reported here show that this competence is not limited to pretend play. 
Three-year-olds also understand the dual identity involved in unusual functional 
use (X is being used as Y), even though they have difficulty understanding 
deceptive appearance (X looks like Y). We suggest that children are able to 
distinguish extrinsic object properties from intrinsic ones (function vs. 
category-membership) better than they can distinguish superficial object 
properties from deep ones (appearance vs. category-membership).

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00537.x
PMID: 17059456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1046. Dev Sci. 2006 Sep;9(5):498-504. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00517.x.

A longitudinal behavioral genetic analysis of task persistence.

Deater-Deckard K(1), Petrill SA, Thompson LA, DeThorne LS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
University, VA 24061, USA. kirbydd@vt.edu

Change in task persistence was assessed in two annual assessments using 
teachers', testers', and observers' ratings. Participants included 79 
monozygotic and 116 same-sex dizygotic twin pairs who were in Kindergarten or 
1st grade (4.3 to 7.9 years old) at the initial assessment. Task persistence was 
widely distributed and higher among older children and girls. Overall, there was 
modest growth in persistence over time, and moderate stability of individual 
differences. Most of the stability was accounted for by genetic influences, 
whereas most of the change was accounted for by nonshared environment, including 
an association with observed differential maternal warm supportive behavior.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00517.x
PMCID: PMC2648051
PMID: 16911452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1047. Dev Sci. 2006 Sep;9(5):473-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00514.x.

Error-related electrocortical responses in 10-year-old children and young 
adults.

Santesso DL(1), Segalowitz SJ, Schmidt LA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Brock University, St Catharines, Canada.

Recent anatomical and electrophysiological evidence suggests that the anterior 
cingulate cortex (ACC) is relatively late to mature. This brain region appears 
to be critical for monitoring, evaluating, and adjusting ongoing behaviors. This 
monitoring elicits characteristic ERP components including the error-related 
negativity (ERN), error positivity (Pe) and correct-related negativity (CRN), 
with the ERN clearly relating to activation of the ACC; however, little 
attention has been paid to the examination of these ERP components in children. 
The present study examined developmental differences in the ERN, Pe, and CRN in 
normal 10-year-old children and young adults in a standard visual flanker task. 
We found that children had smaller ERNs than adults, with no between-group 
differences on the Pe, and some ambiguity concerning the CRN. Results provide 
electrophysiological support either for late maturation of the ACC or late 
involvement of the ACC in response monitoring. Results also suggest that there 
is some functional independence of response-monitoring ERP components. 
Error-related ERPs may be a useful tool in studying the development of this 
brain region and its role in behavior in normal and atypical development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00514.x
PMID: 16911449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1048. Dev Sci. 2006 Mar;9(2):173-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00477.x.

Infants' physical knowledge affects their change detection.

Wang SH(1), Baillargeon R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Santa Cruz, USA. 
suhua@ucsc.edu

Prior research suggests that infants attend to a variable in an event category 
when they have identified it as relevant for predicting outcomes in the 
category, and that the age at which infants identify a variable depends largely 
on the age at which they are exposed to appropriate observations. Thus, 
depending on age of exposure, infants may identify the same variable at 
different ages in different event categories. A good case in point is the 
variable height, which is identified at about 3.5 months in occlusion events, 
but only at about 12 months in covering events and 14 months in tube events. In 
the present experiments, 11-month-olds detected a change to an object's height 
in an occlusion but not a covering event, and 12.5-month-olds detected a similar 
change in a covering but not a tube event. Thus, infants succeeded in detecting 
a change to an object's height in an event where height had been identified as a 
relevant variable, but failed to detect the exact same change in another event 
where height had not yet been identified as a relevant variable. These findings 
provide evidence that infants' physical knowledge affects which changes they 
detect in physical events. Possible mechanisms underlying these findings are 
also discussed, in light of recent accounts of change detection in adults.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00477.x
PMCID: PMC3357321
PMID: 16472318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1049. Dev Sci. 2006 Jan;9(1):40-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00461.x.

Young children make scale errors when playing with dolls.

Ware EA(1), Uttal DH, Wetter EK, Deloache JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208-2710, 
USA. e-ware@northwestern.edu

Prior research (DeLoache, Uttal & Rosengren, 2004) has documented that 18- to 
30-month-olds occasionally make scale errors: they attempt to fit their bodies 
into or onto miniature objects (e.g. a chair) that are far too small for them. 
The current study explores whether scale errors are limited to actions that 
directly involve the child's body. We investigated whether children would also 
make scale errors with a doll and objects that were much too small for the doll 
(e.g. a chair, a bed). Many participants did try to fit the doll into or onto 
the miniature objects. Thus, the previously documented phenomenon of scale 
errors extends to situations in which the relevant size difference is between 
two objects. This finding supports the view that scale errors occur when visual 
information about object size fails to influence the decision to act on an 
object. The results are discussed in terms of the use of visual information for 
the planning and control of actions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00461.x
PMID: 16445394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1050. Dev Sci. 2006 Jan;9(1):21-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00459.x.

Why girls say 'holded' more than boys.

Hartshorne JK(1), Ullman MT.

Author information:
(1)Brain and Language Laboratory, Departments of Neuroscience, Psychology, 
Linguistics and Neurology, Georgetown University, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

Women are better than men at verbal memory tasks, such as remembering word 
lists. These tasks depend on declarative memory. The declarative/procedural 
model of language, which posits that the lexicon of stored words is part of 
declarative memory, while grammatical composition of complex forms depends on 
procedural memory, predicts a female superiority in aspects of lexical memory. 
Other neurocognitive models of language have not made this prediction. Here we 
examine the prediction in past-tense over-regularizations (e.g. holded) produced 
by children. We expected that girls would remember irregular past-tense forms 
(held) better than boys, and thus would over-regularize less. To our surprise, 
girls over-regularized far more than boys. We investigated potential 
explanations for this sex difference. Analyses showed that in girls but not 
boys, over-regularization rates correlated with measures of the number of 
similar-sounding regulars (folded, molded). This sex difference in phonological 
neighborhood effects is taken to suggest that girls tend to produce 
over-regularizations in associative lexical memory, generalizing over stored 
neighboring regulars, while boys are more likely to depend upon rule-governed 
affixation (hold+-ed). The finding is consistent with the hypothesis that, 
likely due to their superior lexical abilities, females tend to retrieve from 
memory complex forms (walked) that men generally compose with the grammatical 
system (walk+-ed). The results suggest that sex may be an important factor in 
the acquisition and computation of language.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00459.x
PMID: 16445392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1051. Dev Sci. 2006 Jan;9(1):1-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00454.x.

A shift from diffuse to focal cortical activity with development.

Durston S(1), Davidson MC, Tottenham N, Galvan A, Spicer J, Fossella JA, Casey 
BJ.

Author information:
(1)Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Medical College of 
Cornell University, New York, USA. S.Durston@azu.nl

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2006 Jan;9(1):9-11.
    Dev Sci. 2006 Jan;9(1):11-4.
    Dev Sci. 2006 Jan;9(1):14-7.

Recent imaging studies have suggested that developmental changes may parallel 
aspects of adult learning in cortical activation becoming less diffuse and more 
focal over time. However, while adult learning studies examine changes within 
subjects, developmental findings have been based on cross-sectional samples and 
even comparisons across studies. Here, we used functional MRI in children to 
test directly for shifts in cortical activity during performance of a cognitive 
control task, in a combined longitudinal and cross-sectional study. Our 
longitudinal findings, relative to our cross-sectional ones, show attenuated 
activation in dorsolateral prefrontal cortical areas, paralleled by increased 
focal activation in ventral prefrontal regions related to task performance.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00454.x
PMID: 16445387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1052. Dev Sci. 2005 Nov;8(6):535-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00445.x.

The development of gaze following and its relation to language.

Brooks R(1), Meltzoff AN.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle 
98195-7920, USA. recheleb@u.washington.edu

We examined the ontogeny of gaze following by testing infants at 9, 10 and 11 
months of age. Infants (N = 96) watched as an adult turned her head toward a 
target with either open or closed eyes. The 10- and 11-month-olds followed adult 
turns significantly more often in the open-eyes than the closed-eyes condition, 
but the 9-month-olds did not respond differentially. Although 9-month-olds may 
view others as 'body orienters', older infants begin to register whether others 
are 'visually connected' to the external world and, hence, understand adult 
looking in a new way. Results also showed a strong positive correlation between 
gaze-following behavior at 10-11 months and subsequent language scores at 18 
months. Implications for social cognition are discussed in light of the 
developmental shift in gaze following between 9 and 11 months of age.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00445.x
PMCID: PMC3640988
PMID: 16246245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1053. Dev Sci. 2005 Nov;8(6):509-18. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00442.x.

Sensitivity to social contingencies between 1 and 3 months of age.

Striano T(1), Henning A, Stahl D.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Cultural Ontogeny, 
Leipzig, Germany. striano@cbs.mpg.de

Infants' sensitivity to social contingencies was assessed. In Study 1, 
1-month-old infants and their mothers interacted face-to-face in three types of 
imperfect contingent interactions: Normal, Non-Contingent and Imitation. 
One-month-old infants did not discriminate these conditions. In Study 2, 
3-month-old infants were tested as in Study 1. At 3 months of age, infants gazed 
reliably longer in the Imitation condition and smiled reliably more in the 
Normal than in the Non-Contingent and Imitation interactions. These findings 
suggest a developmental transition in the sensitivity to social contingencies 
between 1 and 3 months of age. The relationship between the developing 
sensitivity to social contingencies and social cognition is discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00442.x
PMID: 16246242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1054. Dev Sci. 2005 Nov;8(6):481-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00439.x.

Foundations for self and other: a study in autism.

Hobson RP(1), Meyer JA.

Author information:
(1)Developmental Psychopathology Research Unit, Tavistock Clinic, London and 
Institute of Child Health, University College London, UK. r.hobson@ucl.ac.uk

There is controversy over the basis for young children's experience of 
themselves and other people as separate yet related individuals, each with a 
mental perspective on the world - and over the nature of corresponding deficits 
in autism. Here we tested a form of self-other connectedness (identification) in 
children with and without autism, who were group-matched according to CA 
(approximately 6 to 16 years) and verbal MA (approximately 2 1/2 to 14 years), 
and therefore IQ. We gave two forms of a novel 'sticker test' in which children 
needed to communicate to another person where on her body she should place her 
sticker-badge. Across the trials of Study 1, all of the non-autistic children 
pointed to their own bodies at least once, but over half the children with 
autism failed to point to themselves at all, even though they communicated 
successfully in other ways. In Study 2, where a screen was introduced to hide 
the tester's body, group differences in the children's communicative 
self-orientated gestures were most marked after the tester had 'modelled' a 
point-to-herself gesture in communicating to the child. Our interpretation is 
that autism involves a relative failure to adopt the bodily-anchored 
psychological and communicative stance of another person. We suggest that this 
process of identification is essential to self-other relations and grounds young 
children's developing understanding of minds.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00439.x
PMID: 16246239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1055. Dev Sci. 2005 Sep;8(5):444-58. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00433.x.

The genetic relationship between individual differences in social and nonsocial 
behaviours characteristic of autism.

Ronald A(1), Happé F, Plomin R.

Author information:
(1)Social Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry (SGDP) Centre, Institute of 
Psychiatry, King's College London, UK. a.ronald@iop.kcl.ac.uk

Two types of behaviours shown in children - those reflecting social impairment 
and nonsocial obsessive repetitive behaviours - are central to defining and 
diagnosing autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). Parent and teacher data on social 
and nonsocial behaviours were obtained from a community sample of >3000 
7-year-old twin pairs. Social and nonsocial behaviours were only modestly 
correlated, and it was found that some individuals had extreme scores on either 
social or nonsocial scales but not both. Genetic model-fitting showed that 
social and nonsocial behaviours are both highly heritable, but their genetic 
overlap is modest, with most of the genetic influence being specific to either 
social or nonsocial behaviours. Considering these behaviours separately might 
help clarify gene-brain-behaviour pathways in future research.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00433.x
PMID: 16048517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1056. Dev Sci. 2005 Sep;8(5):387-92. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00426.x.

Children's understanding of the Ulysses conflict.

Choe KS(1), Keil FC, Bloom P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology,Yale University, USA. katherine.choe@yale.edu

Two studies explored children's understanding of how the presence of conflicting 
mental states in a single mind can lead people to act so as to subvert their own 
desires. Study 1 analyzed explanations by children (4--7 years) and adults of 
behaviors arising from this sort of 'Ulysses conflict' and compared them with 
their understanding of conflicting desires in different minds, as well as with 
changes of mind within an individual across time. The data revealed that only 
the adults were able to adequately explain the Ulysses conflict. Study 2 asked 
children (4--7 years) and adults to choose among three explicitly presented 
competing explanations for self-subverting behaviors. The results suggest that 
an understanding of the influence of conflicting mental states on behaviors does 
not occur until at least 7 years of age.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00426.x
PMCID: PMC3037259
PMID: 16048510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1057. Dev Sci. 2005 May;8(3):229-39. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00412.x.

Early development of delinquency within divorced families: evaluating a 
randomized preventive intervention trial.

DeGarmo DS(1), Forgatch MS.

Author information:
(1)Oregon Social Learning Center, OR 97401, USA. davidd@oslc.org

This paper reports on an experimental test of coercion theory early onset model 
of delinquency. Results are from the Oregon Divorce Study-II, a randomized 
preventive intervention trial with a sample of 238 recently separated mothers 
and their sons in early elementary school. The objective was to experimentally 
manipulate parenting variables hypothesized to influence development of 
delinquent behaviors. Multiple-method assessment spanned 36 months. Because the 
intervention focused on parent training, we expected that any intervention 
effects on changes in child outcomes would be mediated by hypothesized 
intervening mechanisms. Linear growth models showed significantly greater 
reduction in boys' delinquency and deviant peer affiliation in the experimental 
group relative to the controls. Subsequent models using no method overlap in 
constructs demonstrated that the intervention effect on delinquency operated 
through growth in parenting and reduction in deviant peer affiliation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00412.x
PMID: 15819755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1058. Dev Sci. 2005 May;8(3):F27-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00408.x.

Young children have difficulty ascribing true beliefs.

Riggs KJ(1), Simpson A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, London Metropolitan University, UK. 
k.riggs@londonmet.ac.uk

Using the format of a false belief task (Wimmer & Perner, 1983), we investigated 
the ability of 88 3- and 4-year-olds to ascribe a previously held true belief to 
a story protagonist. In an unexpected transfer task, children found true belief 
ascription as difficult as false belief ascription even though they could answer 
memory questions about story details. Results are discussed in relation to 
theoretical accounts of theory of mind development that stress the importance of 
understanding the falsity of belief, and those accounts that stress the 
importance of information or executive processes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00408.x
PMID: 15819751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1059. Dev Sci. 2005 Mar;8(2):173-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00404.x.

Infants' enumeration of actions: numerical discrimination and its signature 
limits.

Wood JN(1), Spelke ES.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Development Studies, Department of Psychology, Harvard 
University, 33 Kirkland Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. jwood@wjh.harvard.edu

Are abstract representations of number - representations that are independent of 
the particular type of entities that are enumerated - a product of human 
language or culture, or do they trace back to human infancy? To address this 
question, four experiments investigated whether human infants discriminate 
between sequences of actions (jumps of a puppet) on the basis of numerosity. At 
6 months, infants successfully discriminated four- versus eight-jump sequences, 
when the continuous variables of sequence duration, jump duration, jump rate, 
jump interval and duration, and extent of motion were controlled, and rhythm was 
eliminated. In contrast, infants failed to discriminate two- versus four-jump 
sequences, suggesting that infants fail to form cardinal number representations 
of small numbers of actions. Infants also failed to discriminate between 
sequences of four versus six jumps at 6 months, and succeeded at 9 months, 
suggesting that infants' number representations are imprecise and increase in 
precision with age. All of these findings agree with those of studies using 
visual-spatial arrays and auditory sequences, providing evidence that a single, 
abstract system of number representation is present and functional in infancy.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00404.x
PMID: 15720375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1060. Dev Sci. 2005 Mar;8(2):151-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00402.x.

Object identification in preschool children and adults.

Bernstein DM(1), Loftus GR, Meltzoff AN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. 
db6@u.washington.edu

We introduce computer-based methodologies for investigating object 
identification in 3- to 5-year-old children. In two experiments, preschool 
children and adults indicated when they could identify degraded pictures of 
common objects as those pictures either gradually improved or degraded in 
clarity. Clarity transformations were implemented in four ways: blurring, 
decreasing the picture's physical size, decreasing the pixel signal-to-noise 
ratio, and cropping. In Experiment 1, all age groups correctly identified 
objects at a more degraded state when those objects began moderately, as opposed 
to very, degraded and then clarified. This finding supports the notion that 
previous perceptual hypotheses interfere with object identification (i.e. the 
perceptual interference effect). In Experiment 2, children, but not adults, 
overestimated their ability to recognize objects in a degraded state when the 
object's identity was given to them beforehand. This suggests that for young 
children knowledge of the object's true identity cannot be ignored when 
evaluating their current perceptions. This is the first demonstration of the 
perceptual interference effect in children. We discuss both methodological and 
theoretical implications of the findings for research on object perception and 
theory of mind.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00402.x
PMCID: PMC3640978
PMID: 15720373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1061. Dev Sci. 2005 Mar;8(2):115-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00398.x.

Characterizing the ADHD phenotype for genetic studies.

Stevenson J(1), Asherson P, Hay D, Levy F, Swanson J, Thapar A, Willcutt E.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Southampton, Highfield, Southampton SO17 
1 BJ, UK. jsteven@soton.ac.uk

The genetic study of ADHD has made considerable progress. Further developments 
in the field will be reliant in part on identifying the most appropriate 
phenotypes for genetic analysis. The use of both categorical and dimensional 
measures of symptoms related to ADHD has been productive. The use of multiple 
reporters is a valuable feature of the characterization of psychopathology in 
children. It is argued that the use of aggregated measures to characterize the 
ADHD phenotype, particularly to establish its pervasiveness, is desirable. The 
recognition of the multiple comorbidities of ADHD can help to isolate more 
specific genetic influences. In relation to both reading disability and conduct 
disorder there is evidence that genes may be involved in the comorbid condition 
that are different from pure ADHD. To date, progress with the investigation of 
endophenotypes for ADHD has been disappointing. It is suggested that extending 
such studies beyond cognitive underpinnings to include physiological and 
metabolic markers might facilitate progress.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00398.x
PMID: 15720369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1062. Dev Sci. 2005 Jan;8(1):88-101. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00395.x.

Number sense in human infants.

Xu F(1), Spelke ES, Goddard S.

Author information:
(1)Northeastern University, Boston, USA. fei@psych.ubc.ca

Four experiments used a preferential looking method to investigate 6-month-old 
infants' capacity to represent numerosity in visual-spatial displays. Building 
on previous findings that such infants discriminate between arrays of eight 
versus 16 discs, but not eight versus 12 discs (Xu & Spelke, 2000), Experiments 
1 and 2 investigated whether infants' numerosity discrimination depends on the 
ratio of the two set sizes with even larger numerosities. Infants successfully 
discriminated between arrays of 16 versus 32 discs, but not 16 versus 24 discs, 
providing evidence that their discrimination shows the set-size ratio signature 
of numerosity discrimination in human adults, children and many non-human 
animals. Experiments 3 and 4 addressed a controversy concerning infants' ability 
to discriminate large numerosities (observed under conditions that control for 
total filled area, array size and density, item size and correlated properties 
such as brightness: Brannon, 2002; Xu, 2003b; Xu & Spelke, 2000) versus small 
numerosities (not observed under conditions that control for total contour 
length: Clearfield & Mix, 1999). To investigate the sources of these differing 
findings, Experiment 3 tested infants' large-number discrimination with controls 
for contour length, and Experiment 4 tested small-number discrimination with 
controls for total filled area. Infants successfully discriminated the 
large-number displays but showed no evidence of discriminating the small-number 
displays. These findings provide evidence that infants have robust abilities to 
represent large numerosities. In contrast, infants may fail to represent small 
numerosities in visual-spatial arrays with continuous quantity controls, 
consistent with the thesis that separate systems serve to represent large versus 
small numerosities.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00395.x
PMID: 15647069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1063. Dev Sci. 2005 Jan;8(1):57-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00393.x.

On tools and toys: how children learn to act on and pretend with 'virgin 
objects'.

Rakoczy H(1), Tomasello M, Striano T.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Department of 
Developmental and Comparative Psychology, Deutscher Platz 6, D-04103 Leipzig, 
Germany. rakoczy@eva.mpg.de

The focus of the present study was the role of cultural learning in infants' 
acquisition of pretense actions with objects. In three studies, 18- and 
24-month-olds (n = 64) were presented with novel objects, and either pretense or 
instrumental actions were demonstrated with these. When children were then 
allowed to act upon the objects themselves, qualitatively similar patterns of 
cultural (imitative) learning both of pretend and of instrumental actions were 
observed, suggesting that both types of actions can be acquired in similar ways 
through processes of cultural learning involving one or another form of 
collective intentionality. However, both absolute imitation rates and creativity 
were lower in pretense compared to instrumental actions, suggesting that the 
collective intentionality that constitutes pretense is especially difficult for 
children to comprehend. An additional analysis of children's gazes to the 
experimenter during their actions revealed that 24-month-olds looked more often 
to the experimenter during pretense actions than during instrumental actions - 
suggesting that pretense is culturally learned in a similar fashion as practical 
actions, but that young children understand pretense as a more inherently 
social, intersubjective activity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00393.x
PMID: 15647067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1064. Dev Sci. 2005 Jan;8(1):36-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00391.x.

Maladaptive conflict monitoring as evidence for executive dysfunction in 
children with chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome.

Bish JP(1), Ferrante SM, McDonald-McGinn D, Zackai E, Simon TJ.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 3535 Market Street, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA. bish@email.chop.edu

Using an adaptation of the Attentional Networks Test, we investigated aspects of 
executive control in children with chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome 
(DS22q11.2), a common but not well understood disorder that produces non-verbal 
cognitive deficits and a marked incidence of psychopathology. The data revealed 
that children with DS22q11.2 demonstrated greater difficulty than controls in 
locating and processing target items in the presence of distracters. 
Importantly, children with DS22q11.2 showed a deficit in the ability to monitor 
and adapt to stimulus conflict. These data provide evidence of inadequate 
conflict adaptation in children with DS22q11.2, a problem that is also present 
in schizophrenia. The findings of specific executive dysfunction in this group 
may provide a linkage between particular genetic abnormalities and the 
development of psychopathology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00391.x
PMID: 15647065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1065. Dev Sci. 2005 Jan;8(1):16-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00389.x.

Metacognitive development of deaf children: lessons from the appearance-reality 
and false belief tasks.

Courtin C(1), Melot AM.

Author information:
(1)Equipe Développement et fonctionnement cognitifs, Groupe d'imagerie 
neurofonctionnelle, UMR 6194 CNRS - CEA - Universités de Caen et Paris V, 56, 
rue Saint-Jacques, F-75005, Paris, France. cyril.courtin@paris5.sorbonne.fr

'Theory of mind' development is now an important research field in deaf studies. 
Past research with the classic false belief task has consistently reported a 
delay in theory of mind development in deaf children born of hearing parents, 
while performance of second-generation deaf children is more problematic with 
some contradictory results. The present paper is aimed at testing the 
metacognitive abilities of deaf children on two tasks: the appearance-reality 
paradigm designed by Flavell, Flavell and Green (1983) and the classic false 
belief inference task (Wimmer & Perner, 1983; Hogrefe, Wimmer & Perner, 1986). 
Twenty-eight second-generation deaf children, 60 deaf children of hearing 
parents and 36 hearing children, aged 5 to 7, were tested and compared on three 
appearance-reality and three false belief items. Results show that early 
exposure to language, be it signed or oral, facilitates performance on the two 
theory of mind tasks. In addition, native signers equal hearing children in the 
appearance-reality task while surpassing them on the false belief one. The 
differences of performance patterns in the two tasks are discussed in terms of 
linguistic and metarepresentational development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00389.x
PMID: 15647063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1066. Dev Sci. 2005 Jan;8(1):1-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00387.x.

Changing the tune: the structure of the input affects infants' use of absolute 
and relative pitch.

Saffran JR(1), Reeck K, Niebuhr A, Wilson D.

Author information:
(1)Waisman Center and Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
WI 53706, USA. jsaffran@facstaff.wisc.edu

Sequences of notes contain several different types of pitch cues, including both 
absolute and relative pitch information. What factors determine which of these 
cues are used when learning about tone sequences? Previous research suggests 
that infants tend to preferentially process absolute pitch patterns in 
continuous tone sequences, while other types of input elicit relative pitch use 
by infants. In order to ask whether the structure of the input influences 
infants' choice of pitch cues, we presented learners with continuous tone 
streams in which absolute pitch cues were rendered uninformative by transposing 
the tone sequences. Under these circumstances, both infants and adults 
successfully tracked relative pitches in a statistical learning task. 
Implications for the role played by the structure of the input in the learning 
process are considered.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00387.x
PMID: 15647061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1067. Dev Sci. 2004 Nov;7(5):599-611. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00383.x.

Twelve- and 16-month-old infants recognize properties of mentioned absent 
things.

Saylor MM(1).

Author information:
(1)Psychology and Human Development, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37203, 
USA. m.saylor@vanderbilt.edu

Absent reference comprehension is a critical achievement of early development, 
yet little is known about its emergence. In the current study, 12- and 
16-month-old infants' recognition of properties of mentioned absent things was 
used as an index of absent reference comprehension. Infants were presented with 
displays matching the color and prior spatial location of a mentioned absent 
object and displays matching the color and prior spatial location of a 
non-mentioned absent object. Infants could reveal their comprehension of absent 
reference by directing more looking and gesturing at the display matching the 
mentioned absent object than at the display matching the non-mentioned absent 
object. Infants at both ages revealed some tendency to do so, but infants at 16 
months revealed more advanced understanding--infants at 16 months, but not at 12 
months, coordinated their attention to the display matching properties of the 
mentioned absent thing with looks to the speaker. Implications for the infants' 
understanding of communicative intentions are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00383.x
PMID: 15603292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1068. Dev Sci. 2004 Nov;7(5):567-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00381.x.

A first step in form-based category abstraction by 12-month-old infants.

Gómez RL(1), Lakusta L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Arizona, Tucson 85721-0068, USA. 
rgomez@u.arizona.edu

The present experiments investigate how young language learners begin to acquire 
form-based categories and the relationships between them. We investigated this 
question by exposing 12-month-olds to auditory structure of the form aX and bY 
(infants had to learn that a-elements grouped with Xs and not Ys). Infants were 
then tested on strings from their training language versus strings from the 
other language using a preferential-listening procedure. Importantly, the X and 
Y elements were new at test, requiring infants to generalize to novel pairings. 
We also manipulated the probability of encountering grammatical structures of 
the training language by mixing strings from two artificial languages according 
to 83/17 and 67/33 percentage ratios in Experiment 2. Experiment 1 shows that 
12-month-olds are capable of forming categories of X- and Y-elements based on a 
shared feature and, furthermore, form associations between particular a- and 
b-elements and these categories. Experiment 2 shows that learning was sustained 
even when 17% of instances from another language were present during training. 
However, infants failed to generalize when exposed to a larger percentage of 
strings from another language. The findings demonstrate that the first step of 
form-based category abstraction (the ability to generalize based on 
marker-feature pairings) is in place by 12 months of age.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00381.x
PMID: 15603290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1069. Dev Sci. 2004 Nov;7(5):560-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00380.x.

Father absence, menarche and interest in infants among adolescent girls.

Maestripieri D(1), Roney JR, DeBias N, Durante KM, Spaepen GM.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Mind and Biology, University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA. 
dario@uchicago.edu

In this study we examined the relationship between menarche and interest in 
infants among adolescent girls, and the effects of early environment, 
particularly of father absence from home, on both variables. Eighty-three girls 
ranging in age from between 11 and 14 years served as study participants. 
Interest in infants was assessed through their preferences for photos and 
silhouettes of animal and human faces of infants versus adults. Information on 
menarche and the early family environment was obtained with questionnaires and 
interviews. Variation in menarcheal status or timing of menarche was associated 
with some differences in interest in infants. There was little or no evidence, 
however, that suggested a direct causal relationship between these variables. 
Instead, both menarche and interest in infants were independently associated 
with early father absence from home such that father-absent girls exhibited 
earlier menarche and greater attraction to infant visual stimuli than 
father-present girls. Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that father 
absence is associated with a developmental trajectory characterized by earlier 
readiness for reproduction and parenting.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00380.x
PMID: 15603289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1070. Dev Sci. 2004 Jun;7(3):360-77. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00353.x.

The development of complex sentence interpretation in typically developing 
children compared with children with specific language impairments or early 
unilateral focal lesions.

Dick F(1), Wulfeck B, Krupa-Kwiatkowski M, Bates E.

Author information:
(1)Center for Research in Language, University of California, San Diego, USA 
fdick@crl.ucsd.edu

This study compared sentence comprehension skills in typically developing 
children 5-17 years of age, children with language impairment (LI) and children 
with focal brain injuries (FL) acquired in the pre/perinatal period. 
Participants were asked to process sentences 'on-line', choosing the agent in 
sentences that varied in syntactic complexity (actives, passives, subject clefts 
and object clefts), and in the presence or absence of a subject-verb agreement 
contrast. Results revealed that accuracy and processing speeds vary with 
syntactic complexity in all groups, reflecting the frequency and regularity of 
sentence types. Developmental changes continued throughout childhood, as 
children became faster and more accurate at processing more complex sentence 
structures. Children with LI and children with FL were quite profoundly delayed, 
displaying profiles similar to, or more impaired than those of younger children, 
but there was no evidence in the FL group for a disadvantage in left- vs. 
right-hemisphere-damaged children. Children with LI showed one unique pattern: 
higher than normal costs (reflected in reaction times) in using converging 
information from subject-verb agreement, in line with studies suggesting special 
vulnerabilities in grammatical morphology in this group. Results are discussed 
in terms of the Competition Model, a theory of language processing designed to 
account for the statistical changes in performance that are observed during 
development, and the probabilistic deficits in children with language 
impairments.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00353.x
PMID: 15595375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1071. Dev Sci. 2004 Jun;7(3):297-307. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00349.x.

Twelve-month-olds point to share attention and interest.

Liszkowski U(1), Carpenter M, Henning A, Striano T, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Comparative Psychology, Max Planck Institute 
for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany. liszkowski@eva.mpg.de

Infants point for various motives. Classically, one such motive is declarative, 
to share attention and interest with adults to events. Recently, some 
researchers have questioned whether infants have this motivation. In the current 
study, an adult reacted to 12-month-olds' pointing in different ways, and 
infants' responses were observed. Results showed that when the adult shared 
attention and interest (i.e alternated gaze and emoted), infants pointed more 
frequently across trials and tended to prolong each point--presumably to prolong 
the satisfying interaction. However, when the adult emoted to the infant alone 
or looked only to the event, infants pointed less across trials and repeated 
points more within trials--presumably in an attempt to establish joint 
attention. Results suggest that 12-month-olds point declaratively and understand 
that others have psychological states that can be directed and shared.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00349.x
PMID: 15595371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1072. Dev Sci. 2004 Jun;7(3):270-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00345.x.

Tuned to the signal: the privileged status of speech for young infants.

Vouloumanos A(1), Werker JF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Canada. 
athena@psych.mcgill.ca

Do young infants treat speech as a special signal, compared with structurally 
similar non-speech sounds? We presented 2- to 7-month-old infants with nonsense 
speech sounds and complex non-speech analogues. The non-speech analogues retain 
many of the spectral and temporal properties of the speech signal, including the 
pitch contour information which is known to be salient to young listeners, and 
thus provide a stringent test for a potential listening bias for speech. Our 
results show that infants as young as 2 months of age listened longer to speech 
sounds. This listening selectivity indicates that early-functioning biases 
direct infants' attention to speech, granting speech a special status in 
relation to other sounds.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00345.x
PMID: 15595367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1073. Dev Sci. 2004 Feb;7(1):19-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00318.x.

When left means right: an explanation of the left cradling bias in terms of 
right hemisphere specializations.

Bourne VJ(1), Todd BK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex, 
Falmer, Brighton, UK. victoria@sussex.ac.uk

Previous research has indicated that 70-85% of women and girls show a bias to 
hold infants, or dolls, to the left side of their body. This bias is not matched 
in males (e.g. deChateau, Holmberg & Winberg, 1978; Todd, 1995). This study 
tests an explanation of cradling preferences in terms of hemispheric 
specialization for the perception of facial emotional expression. Thirty-two 
right-handed participants were given a behavioural test of lateralization and a 
cradling task. Females, but not males, who cradled a doll on the left side were 
found to have significantly higher laterality quotients than right cradlers. 
Results indicate that women cradle on the side of the body that is contralateral 
to the hemisphere dominant for face and emotion processing and suggest a 
possible explanation of gender differences in the incidence of cradling.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00318.x
PMID: 15323114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1074. Dev Sci. 2004 Feb;7(1):10-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00317.x.

Hemispheric asymmetries in children's perception of nonlinguistic human 
affective sounds.

Pollak SD(1), Holt LL, Wismer Fries AB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin at Madison, 53706-1696, 
USA. spollak@wisc.edu

In the present work, we developed a database of nonlinguistic sounds that mirror 
prosodic characteristics typical of language and thus carry affective 
information, but do not convey linguistic information. In a dichotic-listening 
task, we used these novel stimuli as a means of disambiguating the relative 
contributions of linguistic and affective processing across the hemispheres. 
This method was applied to both children and adults with the goal of 
investigating the role of developing cognitive resource capacity on affective 
processing. Results suggest that children's limited computational resources 
influence how they process affective information and rule out attentional biases 
as a factor in children's perceptual asymmetries for nonlinguistic affective 
sounds. These data further suggest that investigation of perception of 
nonlinguistic affective sounds is a valuable tool in assessing interhemispheric 
asymmetries in affective processing, especially in parceling out linguistic 
contributions to hemispheric differences.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00317.x
PMID: 15323113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1075. Dev Sci. 2004 Feb;7(1):F1-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00315.x.

12- and 18-month-old infants follow gaze to spaces behind barriers.

Moll H(1), Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, 
Leipzig, Germany. moll@eva.mpg.de

Infants follow the gaze direction of others from the middle of the first year of 
life. In attempting to determine how infants understand the looking behavior of 
adults, a number of recent studies have blocked the adult's line of sight in 
some way (e.g. with a blindfold or with a barrier). In contrast, in the current 
studies an adult looked behind a barrier which blocked the child's line of 
sight. Using two different control conditions and several different barrier 
types, 12- and 18-month-old infants locomoted a short distance in order to gain 
the proper viewing angle to follow an experimenter's gaze to locations behind 
barriers. These results demonstrate that, contra Butterworth, even 12-month-old 
infants can follow gaze to locations outside of their current field of view. 
They also add to growing evidence that 12-month-olds have some understanding of 
the looking behaviors of others as an act of seeing.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00315.x
PMID: 15323111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1076. Dev Sci. 2004 Apr;7(2):246-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00342.x.

Face inversion and contrast-reversal effects across development: in contrast to 
the expertise theory.

Itier RJ(1), Taylor MJ.

Author information:
(1)The Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Centre, Toronto, Canada. 
ritier@rotman-baycrest.on.ca

To determine the role of configural changes on the development of face encoding 
and memory, we investigated face recognition in an n-back repetition task with 
upright, inverted and contrast-reversed unfamiliar faces in adults and children 
(8-16 years). Repetitions occurred immediately (0-lag) or after one intervening 
face (1-lag). Face recognition continued to develop beyond 14-16 years, as shown 
with hit rates, d' scores and reaction times that all improved with age. 
Inversion and contrast-reversal effects were found in all subjects but were not 
more pronounced with increasing age, suggesting no increased reliance on 
configural processing and thus arguing against the expertise theory of Diamond 
and Carey (1986). Recognition improved with age in upright but also in inverted 
and contrast-reversed faces, suggesting a quantitative rather than a qualitative 
developmental change in face processing. For all age groups, performances 
decreased and reaction times increased from 0- to 1-lag conditions similarly, 
suggesting a similar memory component involved in adults' and children's 
processing. These data suggest gradual quantitative improvements in face 
processing with age, mainly due to increasing working memory processing 
capacity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00342.x
PMID: 15320383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1077. Dev Sci. 2004 Apr;7(2):225-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00341.x.

Changes in reality monitoring and episodic memory in early childhood.

Sluzenski J(1), Newcombe N, Ottinger W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Temple University, Phildelphia, PA 19122-6085, USA. 
jsluzens@temple.edu

The purposes of this research were to examine the developmental relation between 
reality monitoring and episodic memory, to link reality monitoring to 
autobiographical memory by using extended naturalistic events, and to examine 
prefrontal functioning as a potential contributor to development in reality 
monitoring and episodic memory. In Experiment 1, 4-year-olds were worse than 6- 
or 8-year-olds at reality monitoring after a week delay, despite the fact that 
they remembered more about real than imagined events and remembered different 
aspects of each. In Experiments 2 and 3, reality monitoring and episodic memory 
were evaluated for 4- and 6-year-olds immediately after the events occurred and, 
in Experiment 3, again after a week delay. Reality monitoring was at higher 
levels for both age groups, but age differences remained. These data suggest 
that preschoolers' difficulties with reality monitoring result from a 
combination of episodic memory deficits and strategic differences. In addition, 
correlation analyses more directly linked preschoolers' reality monitoring to 
episodic memory and supported the hypothesis that episodic memory development is 
related to prefrontal functioning.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00341.x
PMID: 15320382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1078. Dev Sci. 2004 Apr;7(2):175-84. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00336.x.

Perception of serial order in infants.

Lewkowicz DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Florida Atlantic University, Davie 33314, USA. 
david.lewkowicz@fau.edu

Serial order is fundamental to perception, cognition and behavioral action. 
Three experiments investigated infants' perception, learning and discrimination 
of serial order. Four- and 8-month-old infants were habituated to three 
sequentially moving objects making visible and audible impacts and then were 
tested on separate test trials for their ability to detect auditory, visual or 
auditory-visual changes in their ordering. The 4-month-old infants did not 
respond to any order changes and instead appeared to attend to the 'local' 
audio-visual synchrony part of the event. When this local part of the event was 
blocked from view, the 4-month-olds did perceive the serial order feature of the 
event but only when it was specified multimodally. In contrast, the 8-month-old 
infants perceived all three kinds of order changes regardless of whether the 
synchrony part of the event was visible or not. The findings show that 
perception of spatiotemporal serial order emerges early in infancy and that its 
perception is initially facilitated by multimodal specification.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00336.x
PMID: 15320377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1079. Dev Sci. 2000 Nov;3(4):405-414. doi: 10.1111/1467-7687.00135.

Children's coding of human action: cognitive factors influencing imitation in 
3-year-olds.

Gleissner B(1), Meltzoff AN(2), Bekkering H(1).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Psychological Research, University of Washington, 
USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Washington, USA.

We used imitation as a tool for investigating how young children code action. 
The study was designed to examine the errors children make in re-enacting manual 
gestures they see. Thirty-two 3-year-old children served as subjects. Each child 
was shown 24 gestures, generated by systematically crossing four factors: visual 
monitoring, spatial endpoint, movement path, and number of hands. The results 
showed no difference as a function of whether the children could visually 
monitor their own responses. Interestingly, children made significantly more 
errors when the adult's action terminated on a body part than they did when the 
same movement terminated near the body part. There were also significantly more 
errors when the demonstrated act involved crossing midline than when it did not, 
and more errors when it involved one hand rather than two hands. Our hypothesis 
is that human acts are coded in terms of goals. The goals are hierarchically 
organized, and because young children have difficulty simultaneously integrating 
multiple goals into one act they often re-enact the goals that are ranked 
higher, which leads to the errors observed. We argue that imitation is an active 
reconstruction of perceived events and taps cognitive processing. We suggest 
that the goal-based imitation in 3-year-olds is a natural developmental 
outgrowth of the perceptual-motor mapping and goal-directed coding of human acts 
found in infancy.

DOI: 10.1111/1467-7687.00135
PMCID: PMC4137778
PMID: 25147476


1080. Dev Sci. 2000 May;3(2):148-162. doi: 10.1111/1467-7687.00108. Epub 2001 Dec 25.

Developmental changes in sensitivity to vocal paralanguage.

Friend M(1).

Author information:
(1)San Diego State University, USA.

Developmental changes in children's sensitivity to the role of acoustic 
variation in the speech stream in conveying speaker affect (vocal paralanguage) 
were examined. Four-, 7- and 10-year-olds heard utterances in three formats: 
low-pass filtered, reiterant, and normal speech. The availability of lexical and 
paralinguistic information varied across these three formats in a way that 
required children to base their judgments of speaker affect on different 
configurations of cues in each format. Across ages, the best performance was 
obtained when a rich array of acoustic cues was present and when there was no 
competing lexical information. Four-year-olds performed at chance when judgments 
had to be based solely on speech prosody in the filtered format and they were 
unable to selectively attend to paralanguage when discrepant lexical cues were 
present in normal speech. Seven-year-olds were significantly more sensitive to 
the paralinguistic role of speech prosody in filtered speech than were 
4-year-olds and there was a trend toward greater attention to paralanguage when 
lexical and paralinguistic cues were inconsistent in normal speech. An 
integration of the ability to utilize prosodic cues to speaker affect with 
attention to paralanguage in cases of lexical/paralinguistic discrepancy was 
observed for 10-year-olds. The results are discussed in terms of the development 
of a perceptual bias emerging out of selective attention to language.

DOI: 10.1111/1467-7687.00108
PMCID: PMC5510948
PMID: 28713218


1081. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13032. doi: 10.1111/desc.13032. Epub 2020 Sep 15.

Infant Spontaneous Motor Tempo.

Rocha S(1)(2), Southgate V(3), Mareschal D(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Birkbeck University of London, 
London, UK.
(2)Centre for Neuroscience in Education, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Spontaneous Motor Tempo (SMT) is influenced by individual differences in age and 
body size. We present the first data documenting the SMT of infants from 5 to 
37 months of age using a simple drumming task. As in late childhood and 
adulthood, we predicted that infant SMT would slow across the first years of 
life. However, we find that older infants drum more quickly than younger 
infants. Furthermore, studies of adults suggest larger bodies prefer slower 
rhythms. This relationship may be the product of biomechanical resonance, or 
effects may be driven by rhythmic experience, such as of locomotion. We used 
infants, whose body size is dissociated from their predominant experience of 
locomotion as their parent often carries them, to test this argument. We reveal 
that infant SMT is predicted by parent, but not own, body size, supporting a 
passive experience-based argument, and propose that early rhythm may be set by 
repetitive vestibular stimulation when carried by the caregiver.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13032
PMID: 32860482


1082. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13023. doi: 10.1111/desc.13023. Epub 2020 Aug 7.

Is that a pibu or a pibo? Children with reading and language deficits show 
difficulties in learning and overnight consolidation of phonologically similar 
pseudowords.

Malins JG(1)(2), Landi N(2)(3), Ryherd K(2)(3), Frijters JC(4), Magnuson JS(3), 
Rueckl JG(2)(3), Pugh KR(2)(3)(5)(6), Sevcik R(1), Morris R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(2)Haskins Laboratories, New Haven, CT, USA.
(3)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, 
USA.
(4)Faculty of Social Sciences, Department of Child and Youth Studies, Brock 
University, St. Catharines, ON, Canada.
(5)Department of Linguistics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
(6)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT, USA.

Word learning is critical for the development of reading and language 
comprehension skills. Although previous studies have indicated that word 
learning is compromised in children with reading disability (RD) or 
developmental language disorder (DLD), it is less clear how word learning 
difficulties manifest in children with comorbid RD and DLD. Furthermore, it is 
unclear whether word learning deficits in RD or DLD include difficulties with 
offline consolidation of newly learned words. In the current study, we employed 
an artificial lexicon learning paradigm with an overnight design to investigate 
how typically developing (TD) children (N = 25), children with only RD (N = 93), 
and children with both RD and DLD (N = 34) learned and remembered a set of 
phonologically similar pseudowords. Results showed that compared to TD children, 
children with RD exhibited: (i) slower growth in discrimination accuracy for 
cohort item pairs sharing an onset (e.g. pibu-pibo), but not for rhyming item 
pairs (e.g. pibu-dibu); and (ii) lower discrimination accuracy for both cohort 
and rhyme item pairs on Day 2, even when accounting for differences in Day 1 
learning. Moreover, children with comorbid RD and DLD showed learning and 
retention deficits that extended to unrelated item pairs that were 
phonologically dissimilar (e.g. pibu-tupa), suggestive of broader impairments 
compared to children with only RD. These findings provide insights into the 
specific learning deficits underlying RD and DLD and motivate future research 
concerning how children use phonological similarity to guide the organization of 
new word knowledge.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13023
PMID: 32691904


1083. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13020. doi: 10.1111/desc.13020. Epub 2020 Aug 5.

The effects of prematurity and socioeconomic deprivation on early speech 
perception: A story of two different delays.

Gonzalez-Gomez N(1), O'Brien F(2), Harris M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, UK.
(2)Oxford University Hospitals, NHS, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

There is evidence showing that both maturational and environmental factors can 
impact on later language development. On the one hand, preterm birth has been 
found to increase the risk of deficits in the preschool and school years. 
Preterm children show poorer auditory discrimination, reading difficulties, poor 
vocabulary, less complex expressive language and lower receptive understanding 
than their matched controls. On the other hand, socioeconomic status (SES) 
indicators (i.e., income, education and occupation) have been found to be 
strongly related to linguistic abilities during the preschool and school years. 
However, there is very little information about how these factors result in 
lower linguistic abilities. The present study addresses this issue. To do so, we 
investigated early speech perception in full and preterm infants from families 
classed as high or low SES. Seventy-six infants were followed longitudinally at 
7.5, 9, 10.5 and 12 months of age. At each test point, three studies explored 
infants' phonetic, prosodic and phonotactic development respectively. Results 
showed no significant differences between the phonetic or the phonotactic 
development of the preterm and the full-term infants. However, a time-lag 
between preterm and full-term developmental timing for prosody was found. 
Socioeconomic status did not have a significant effect on prosodic development. 
Nonetheless, phonetic and phonotactic development was affected by SES, infants 
from lower SES showed phonetic discrimination of non-native contrast and a 
preference for high-probability sequences later than their more advantaged 
peers. Overall these results suggest that different constraints apply to the 
acquisition of different phonological subcomponents.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13020
PMID: 32687657


1084. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13021. doi: 10.1111/desc.13021. Epub 2020 Aug 7.

Culturally learned first impressions occur rapidly and automatically and emerge 
early in development.

Eggleston A(1), Flavell JC(1), Tipper SP(1), Cook R(1)(2), Over H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of York, York, UK.
(2)Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London, London, 
UK.

Previous research indicates that first impressions from faces are the products 
of automatic and rapid processing and emerge early in development. These 
features have been taken as evidence that first impressions have a phylogenetic 
origin. We examine whether first impressions acquired through learning can also 
possess these features. First, we confirm that adults rate a person as more 
intelligent when they are wearing glasses (Study 1). Next, we show this 
inference persists when participants are instructed to ignore the glasses (Study 
2) and when viewing time is restricted to 100 ms (Study 3). Finally, we show 
that 6-year-old, but not 4-year-old, children perceive individuals wearing 
glasses to be more intelligent, indicating that the effect is seen relatively 
early in development (Study 4). These data indicate that automaticity, rapid 
access and early emergence are not evidence that first impressions have an 
innate origin. Rather, these features are equally compatible with a learning 
model.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13021
PMID: 32687621


1085. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13016. doi: 10.1111/desc.13016. Epub 2020 Aug 10.

Caring babies: Concern for others in distress during infancy.

Davidov M(1), Paz Y(1), Roth-Hanania R(2), Uzefovsky F(3), Orlitsky T(1), 
Mankuta D(1)(4), Zahn-Waxler C(5).

Author information:
(1)The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
(2)Tel Aviv-Yaffo Academic College, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel.
(4)Hadassah Ein Karem Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(5)University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.

Concern for distressed others is a highly valued human capacity, but little is 
known about its early ontogeny. Theoretical accounts of empathy development have 
emphasized stages, but this has been called into question. This study sheds new 
light on four key issues: onset, consistency, development, and predictive power 
of early manifestations of concern for others. Three-month-old Israei infants 
(N = 165) were followed longitudinally at ages 6, 12, and 18 months, and their 
observed responses to others' distress were assessed. Concern for distressed 
others was seen early in the first year of life, long before previous theories 
assumed. Empathic concern was moderately consistent across both situation and 
age, from as early as 3 months. Concern for others grew only modestly with age, 
plateauing during the second year, whereas prosocial behavior increased rapidly 
during the second year. Early individual differences in concern for others 
predicted later prosocial behavior on behalf of distressed others. Findings 
underscore the early roots of caring, and appear to refute assumptions of prior 
stage theories of empathy development, by showing that concern for others 
develops much earlier and more gradually than previously assumed.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13016
PMID: 32649796


1086. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan;24(1):e13000. doi: 10.1111/desc.13000. Epub 2020 Jul 28.

Puberty drives fear learning during adolescence.

Stenson AF(1)(2), Nugent NR(3), van Rooij SJH(2), Minton ST(1)(2), Compton 
AB(2), Hinrichs R(2), Jovanovic T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurosciences, Wayne State University 
School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(3)Departments of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Pediatrics, and Emergency 
Medicine, Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.

Risk for adverse outcomes, including the onset of mental illness, increases 
during adolescence. This increase may be linked to both new exposures, such as 
violence at home or in the community, or to physiological changes driven by 
puberty. There are significant sex differences in adolescent risk, for instance, 
anxiety disorders are significantly more prevalent in girls than boys. Fear 
learning is linked to mental health and may develop during adolescence, but the 
role of puberty in adolescent-specific change has not yet been systematically 
evaluated. We conducted a longitudinal study of fear learning that tested 
fear-potentiated startle (FPS) in 78 children (40 girls) aged 8-16 years. 
Participants completed two to three visits that included a differential fear 
conditioning task and self-report of both pubertal status and violence exposure. 
We tested for effects of sex, pubertal status, and violence exposure on FPS over 
time with latent growth curve models. We also examined the association between 
FPS and later anxiety symptoms. We found significant changes in FPS to the 
threat cue, but not the safety cue, across visits. Higher pubertal status was 
significantly associated with increased FPS to threat cues at each visit, 
whereas sex and violence exposure were not. FPS to threat during the baseline 
visit also predicted later anxiety symptoms. These findings suggest that puberty 
drives increased fear response to threat cues similarly for girls and boys, and 
that this effect may not be significantly impacted by individual differences in 
violence exposure during early adolescence.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13000
PMID: 32497415


1087. Dev Sci. 2018 Nov;21(6):e12686. doi: 10.1111/desc.12686. Epub 2018 Jun 11.

Community violence exposure in early adolescence: Longitudinal associations with 
hippocampal and amygdala volume and resting state connectivity.

Saxbe D(1), Khoddam H(1), Piero LD(2), Stoycos SA(1), Gimbel SI(3), Margolin 
G(1), Kaplan JT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA.
(2)VA Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Brain and Creativity Institute, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.

Community violence exposure is a common stressor, known to compromise youth 
cognitive and emotional development. In a diverse, urban sample of 22 
adolescents, participants reported on community violence exposure (witnessing a 
beating or illegal drug use, hearing gun shots, or other forms of community 
violence) in early adolescence (average age 12.99), and underwent a neuroimaging 
scan 3-5 years later (average age 16.92). Community violence exposure in early 
adolescence predicted smaller manually traced left and right hippocampal and 
amygdala volumes in a model controlling for age, gender, and concurrent 
community violence exposure, measured in late adolescence. Community violence 
continued to predict hippocampus (but not amygdala) volumes after we also 
controlled for family aggression exposure in early adolescence. Community 
violence exposure was also associated with stronger resting state connectivity 
between the right hippocampus (using the manually traced structure as a seed 
region) and bilateral frontotemporal regions including the superior temporal 
gyrus and insula. These resting state connectivity results held after 
controlling for concurrent community violence exposure, SES, and family 
aggression. Although this is the first study focusing on community violence in 
conjunction with brain structure and function, these results dovetail with other 
research linking childhood adversity with smaller subcortical volumes in 
adolescence and adulthood, and with altered frontolimbic resting state 
connectivity. Our findings suggest that even community-level exposure to 
neighborhood violence can have detectable neural correlates in adolescents.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12686
PMID: 29890029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1088. Dev Sci. 2018 Jan;21(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12503. Epub 2017 Jan 16.

Speaking a tone language enhances musical pitch perception in 3-5-year-olds.

Creel SC(1), Weng M(2), Fu G(3), Heyman GD(4), Lee K(2)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Science, UC San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(2)Zhejiang Normal University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(3)Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(4)Department of Psychology, UC San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(5)Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
ON, Canada.

Young children learn multiple cognitive skills concurrently (e.g., language and 
music). Evidence is limited as to whether and how learning in one domain affects 
that in another during early development. Here we assessed whether exposure to a 
tone language benefits musical pitch processing among 3-5-year-old children. 
More specifically, we compared the pitch perception of Chinese children who 
spoke a tone language (i.e., Mandarin) with English-speaking American children. 
We found that Mandarin-speaking children were more advanced at pitch processing 
than English-speaking children but both groups performed similarly on a control 
music task (timbre discrimination). The findings support the Pitch 
Generalization Hypothesis that tone languages drive attention to pitch in 
nonlinguistic contexts, and suggest that language learning benefits aspects of 
music perception in early development. A video abstract of this article can be 
viewed at: https://youtu.be/UY0kpGpPNA0.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12503
PMID: 28093846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1089. Dev Sci. 2018 Jan;21(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12492. Epub 2016 Dec 29.

Taxing behavioral control diminishes sharing and costly punishment in childhood.

Steinbeis N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Educational Psychology, University of Leiden, 
Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Department of 
Social Neuroscience, Stephanstraße 1A, 04103 Leipzig.

Instances of altruism in children are well documented. However, the underlying 
mechanisms of such altruistic behavior are still under considerable debate. 
While some claim that altruistic acts occur automatically and spontaneously, 
others argue that they require behavioral control. This study focuses on the 
mechanisms that give rise to prosocial decisions such as sharing and costly 
punishment. In two studies it is shown in 124 children aged 6-9 years that 
behavioral control plays a critical role for both prosocial decisions and costly 
punishment. Specifically, the studies assess the influence of taxing aspects of 
self-regulation, such as behavioral control (Study 1) and emotion regulation 
(Study 2) on subsequent decisions in a Dictator and an Ultimatum Game. Further, 
children's perception of fairness norms and emotional experience were measured. 
Taxing children's behavioral control prior to making their decisions reduced 
sharing and costly punishment of unfair offers, without changing perception of 
fairness norms or the emotional experience. Conversely, taxing children's 
emotion regulation prior to making their decisions only led to increased 
experience of anger at seeing unfair offers, but left sharing, costly punishment 
and the perception of fairness norms unchanged. These findings stress the 
critical role of behavioral control in prosocial giving and costly punishment in 
childhood.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12492
PMID: 28032451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1090. Dev Sci. 2018 Jan;21(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12505. Epub 2016 Dec 18.

Interpersonal movement synchrony facilitates pro-social behavior in children's 
peer-play.

Tunçgenç B(1), Cohen E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cognitive and Evolutionary Anthropology, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, UK.
(2)Wadham College, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

The emergence of pro-social behaviors and social interaction skills is a major 
focus of research on children's development. Here, we consider one important 
feature of human social interactions, interpersonal movement synchrony, and 
explore its effects on pro-sociality among young children. Coordinated movements 
are a crucial part of mother-infant interactions, with important social effects 
extending well into childhood. Musical interactions are also known to facilitate 
bonding between infants and caretakers and pro-sociality among peers. We 
specifically examine the pro-social effects of interpersonal movement synchrony 
in a naturalistic peer-play context among 4- to 6-year-old children. We assessed 
the amount of helping behavior between pairs of children following an activity 
that they performed synchronously or non-synchronously. Children who engaged in 
synchronous play, as compared with non-synchronous play, showed significantly 
more subsequent spontaneous helping behavior. Further, more mutual smiling and 
eye contact were observed in the synchronous condition and amounts of mutual 
smiling and eye contact during the movement task correlated with amount of 
helping behavior observed. Neither measure mediated the condition-wise effects 
on helping, however. These results are discussed in terms of their contribution 
to existing literature and their broader implications for the development of 
pro-sociality and coordinated movements in early childhood.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12505
PMID: 27990719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1091. Dev Sci. 2017 Nov;20(6). doi: 10.1111/desc.12465. Epub 2016 Dec 13.

Diminished ability to identify facial emotional expressions in children with 
disorganized attachment representations.

Forslund T(1), Kenward B(2), Granqvist P(3), Gredebäck G(1), Brocki KC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Uppsala University, Sweden.
(2)Department of Psychology, Oxford Brookes University, UK.
(3)Department of Psychology, Stockholm University, Sweden.

The development of children's ability to identify facial emotional expressions 
has long been suggested to be experience dependent, with parental caregiving as 
an important influencing factor. This study attempts to further this knowledge 
by examining disorganization of the attachment system as a potential 
psychological mechanism behind aberrant caregiving experiences and deviations in 
the ability to identify facial emotional expressions. Typically developing 
children (N = 105, 49.5% boys) aged 6-7 years (M = 6 years 8 months, 
SD = 1.8 months) completed an attachment representation task and an emotion 
identification task, and parents rated children's negative emotionality. The 
results showed a generally diminished ability in disorganized children to 
identify facial emotional expressions, but no response biases. Disorganized 
attachment was also related to higher levels of negative emotionality, but 
discrimination of emotional expressions did not moderate or mediate this 
relation. Our novel findings relate disorganized attachment to deviations in 
emotion identification, and therefore suggest that disorganization of the 
attachment system may constitute a psychological mechanism linking aberrant 
caregiving experiences to deviations in children's ability to identify facial 
emotional expressions. Our findings further suggest that deviations in emotion 
identification in disorganized children, in the absence of maltreatment, may 
manifest in a generally diminished ability to identify emotional expressions, 
rather than in specific response biases.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12465
PMID: 27966280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1092. Dev Sci. 2017 Nov;20(6). doi: 10.1111/desc.12466. Epub 2016 Dec 13.

Diverse ontogenies of reciprocal and prosocial behavior: cooperative development 
in Fiji and the United States.

House BR(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Origins, Arizona State University, USA.

Contingent reciprocity is an important foundation of human cooperation, but we 
know little about how reciprocal behavior develops across diverse societies, nor 
about how the development of reciprocal behavior is related to the development 
of prosocial behavior more broadly. Three- to 16-year-old children were 
presented with the opportunity to control the allocation of real food rewards in 
a binary-choice cooperative dilemma. Within dyads children alternated making 
choices across multiple trials, and reciprocal behavior emerged in three diverse 
populations (rural Fijian villages, and urban communities in both Fiji and the 
United States) by age 7-8. There was more societal variation in prosocial 
behavior than in reciprocal behavior, and there were more substantial 
differences between Fijians and Americans than between rural and urban 
populations. This suggests that the development of prosocial behavior is not 
driven entirely by the development of reciprocity, and differences in prosocial 
behavior across rural Fijians and urban Americans may not be due only to 
differences across rural and urban populations.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12466
PMID: 27966254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1093. Dev Sci. 2018 Jan;21(1):e12498. doi: 10.1111/desc.12498. Epub 2016 Dec 5.

Perceptual narrowing towards adult faces is a cross-cultural phenomenon in 
infancy: a behavioral and near-infrared spectroscopy study with Japanese 
infants.

Kobayashi M(1)(2), Macchi Cassia V(3), Kanazawa S(4), Yamaguchi MK(5), Kakigi 
R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Physiology, National Institute for Physiological 
Sciences, Japan.
(2)Japan Society for Promotion of Science, Japan.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Milano-Bicocca, Italy.
(4)Department of Psychology, Japan Women's University, Japan.
(5)Department of Psychology, Chuo University, Japan.

Recent data showed that, in Caucasian infants, perceptual narrowing occurs for 
own-race adult faces between 3 and 9 months of age, possibly as a consequence of 
the extensive amount of social and perceptual experience accumulated with 
caregivers and/or other adult individuals of the same race of the caregiver. The 
neural correlates of this developmental process remain unexplored, and it is 
currently unknown whether perceptual tuning towards adult faces can be extended 
to other cultures. To this end, in the current study we tested the ability of 3- 
and 9-month-old Japanese infants to discriminate among adult and infant Asian 
faces in a visual familiarization task (Experiment 1), and compared 
9-month-olds' cerebral hemodynamic responses to adult and infant faces as 
measured by near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) (Experiment 2). Results showed 
that 3-month-olds exhibit above-chance discrimination of adult and infant faces, 
whereas 9-month-olds discriminate adult faces but not infant faces (Experiment 
1). Moreover, adult faces, but not infant faces, induced significant increases 
in hemodynamic responses in the right temporal areas of 9-month-old infants. 
Overall, our data suggest that perceptual narrowing towards adult faces is a 
cross-cultural phenomenon occurring between 3 and 9 months of age, and 
translates by 9 months of age into a right-hemispheric specialization in the 
processing of adult faces.

© 2016 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12498
PMCID: PMC5763342
PMID: 27921339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1094. Dev Sci. 2017 Sep;20(5). doi: 10.1111/desc.12478. Epub 2016 Nov 22.

Blindness to background: an inbuilt bias for visual objects.

O'Hanlon CG(1), Read JCA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Aberystwyth University, UK.
(2)Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle University, UK.

Sixty-eight 2- to 12-year-olds and 30 adults were shown colorful displays on a 
touchscreen monitor and trained to point to the location of a named color. 
Participants located targets near-perfectly when presented with four abutting 
colored patches. When presented with three colored patches on a colored 
background, toddlers failed to locate targets in the background. Eye tracking 
demonstrated that the effect was partially mediated by a tendency not to fixate 
the background. However, the effect was abolished when the targets were named as 
nouns, whilst the change to nouns had little impact on eye movement patterns. 
Our results imply a powerful, inbuilt tendency to attend to objects, which may 
slow the development of color concepts and acquisition of color words. A video 
abstract of this article can be viewed at: https://youtu.be/TKO1BPeAiOI. 
[Correction added on 27 January 2017, after first online publication: The video 
abstract link was added.].

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12478
PMID: 27873433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1095. Dev Sci. 2018 Jan;21(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12507. Epub 2016 Nov 17.

When preschoolers follow their eyes and older children follow their noses: 
visuo-olfactory social affective matching in childhood.

Cavazzana A(1)(2), Wesarg C(1), Parish-Morris J(3), Lundström JN(1)(4)(5), Parma 
V(1)(3)(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)Monell Chemical Senses Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of General Psychology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(3)Center for Autism Research, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)SISSA, Neuroscience Area, Trieste, Italy.

Recognition of emotional facial expressions is a crucial skill for adaptive 
behavior that most often occurs in a multi-sensory context. Affective matching 
tasks have been used across development to investigate how people integrate 
facial information with other senses. Given the relative affective strength of 
olfaction and its relevance in mediating social information since birth, we 
assessed olfactory-visual matching abilities in a group of 140 children between 
the ages of 3 and 11 years old. We presented one of three odor primes (rose, 
fish and no-odor, rated as pleasant or unpleasant by individual children) before 
a facial choice task (happy vs. disgusted face). Children were instructed to 
select one of two faces. As expected, children of all ages tended to choose 
happy faces. Children younger than 5 years of age were biased towards choosing 
the happy face, irrespective of the odor smelled. After age 5, an affective 
matching strategy guided children's choices. Smelling a pleasant odor predicted 
the choice of happy faces, whereas smelling the unpleasant or fish odor 
predicted the choice of disgusted faces. The present study fills a gap in the 
developmental literature on olfactory-visual affective strategies that affect 
decision-making, and represents an important step towards understanding the 
underlying developmental processes that shape the typical social mind.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12507
PMID: 27859959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1096. Dev Sci. 2018 Jan;21(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12487. Epub 2016 Oct 27.

Mothers speak differently to infants at-risk for dyslexia.

Kalashnikova M(1), Goswami U(2), Burnham D(1).

Author information:
(1)The MARCS Institute for Brain, Behaviour and Development, Western Sydney 
University, Australia.
(2)Centre for Neuroscience in Education, University of Cambridge, UK.

Dyslexia is a neurodevelopmental disorder manifested in deficits in reading and 
spelling skills that is consistently associated with difficulties in 
phonological processing. Dyslexia is genetically transmitted, but its 
manifestation in a particular individual is thought to depend on the interaction 
of epigenetic and environmental factors. We adopt a novel interactional 
perspective on early linguistic environment and dyslexia by simultaneously 
studying two pre-existing factors, one maternal and one infant, that may 
contribute to these interactions; and two behaviours, one maternal and one 
infant, to index the effect of these factors. The maternal factor is whether 
mothers are themselves dyslexic or not (with/without dyslexia) and the infant 
factor is whether infants are at-/not-at family risk for dyslexia (due to their 
mother or father being dyslexic). The maternal behaviour is mothers' 
infant-directed speech (IDS), which typically involves vowel hyperarticulation, 
thought to benefit speech perception and language acquisition. The infant 
behaviour is auditory perception measured by infant sensitivity to amplitude 
envelope rise time, which has been found to be reduced in dyslexic children. 
Here, at-risk infants showed significantly poorer acoustic sensitivity than 
not-at-risk infants and mothers only hyperarticulated vowels to infants who were 
not at-risk for dyslexia. Mothers' own dyslexia status had no effect on IDS 
quality. Parental speech input is thus affected by infant risk status, with 
likely consequences for later linguistic development.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12487
PMID: 27785865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1097. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):1011-1019. doi: 10.1111/desc.12388. Epub 2016 Jan 21.

Trust matters: Seeing how an adult treats another person influences 
preschoolers' willingness to delay gratification.

Michaelson LE(1), Munakata Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of Colorado Boulder, 
USA. laura.michaelson@colorado.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of Colorado Boulder, 
USA.

Holding out for a delayed reward in the face of temptation is notoriously 
difficult, and the ability to do so in childhood predicts diverse indices of 
life success. Prominent explanations focus on the importance of cognitive 
control. However, delaying gratification may also require trust in people 
delivering future rewards as promised. Only limited experimental work has tested 
this idea, and such studies with children were focused on general reward 
expectations, so evidence was ambiguous as to whether social trust played a 
role. The present study provides the first targeted test of a role for social 
trust in children's willingness to delay gratification. Children observed an 
adult behave in either a trustworthy or untrustworthy manner toward another 
adult, then were tested in the classic delay of gratification task by that 
adult. Children were less likely to wait the full delay period, and waited less 
time overall, for a reward promised by an untrustworthy adult, relative to 
children tested by a trustworthy adult. These findings demonstrate that 
manipulations of social trust influence delaying gratification, and highlight 
intriguing alternative reasons to test for individual differences in delaying 
gratification and associated life outcomes.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12388
PMID: 26799458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1098. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):982-991. doi: 10.1111/desc.12356. Epub 2015 Nov 5.

On the relationship between phonological awareness, morphological awareness and 
Chinese literacy skills: evidence from an 8-year longitudinal study.

Pan J(1)(2), Song S(3), Su M(3), McBride C(4), Liu H(5), Zhang Y(3)(6), Li H(5), 
Shu H(7).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning & IDG/McGovern 
Institute for Brain Research, Beijing Normal University, P.R. China. 
jinger.pan@uni-potsdam.de.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Potsdam, Germany. 
jinger.pan@uni-potsdam.de.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning & IDG/McGovern 
Institute for Brain Research, Beijing Normal University, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Psychology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, P.R. China.
(5)School of Psychology, Beijing Normal University, P.R. China.
(6)Research Center for Applied Psychology of Sichuan, Chengdu Medical College, 
P.R. China.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning & IDG/McGovern 
Institute for Brain Research, Beijing Normal University, P.R. China. 
shuh@bnu.edu.cn.

The present study reported data on phonological awareness, morphological 
awareness, and Chinese literacy skills of 294 children from an 8-year 
longitudinal study. Results showed that mainland Chinese children's preliterate 
syllable awareness at ages 4 to 6 years uniquely predicted post-literate 
morphological awareness at ages 7 to 10 years. Preliterate syllable awareness 
directly contributed to character reading and writing at age 11 years, while 
post-literate phonemic awareness predicted only character reading at age 11 
years. In addition, preliterate syllable and morphological awareness at ages 4 
to 6 years had indirect effects on character reading and writing, reading 
fluency, and reading comprehension at age 11 years, through post-literate 
morphological awareness at ages 7 to 10 years. Findings underscore the 
significant role of syllable awareness in Chinese character reading and writing, 
and the importance of morphological awareness in character-level processing and 
high-level literacy skills. More importantly, our results suggest the unique 
relation of syllable awareness and morphological awareness in Chinese as they 
focus on the same unit, which is also likely to map directly onto a character, 
the basic unit for high-level Chinese reading skills.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12356
PMID: 26537834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1099. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):1067-1074. doi: 10.1111/desc.12352. Epub 2015 Nov 5.

Longitudinal evidence linking processing speed to the development of reasoning.

Kail RV(1), Lervåg A(2), Hulme C(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University, USA. 
rkail@purdue.edu.
(2)Department of Education, University of Oslo, Norway.
(3)Division of Psychology and Language Sciences, University College London, UK.

Erratum in
    Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2):

Age-related change in processing speed has been linked directly to increases in 
reasoning as well as indirectly via increases in the capacity of working memory 
(WM). Most of the evidence linking change in speed to reasoning has come from 
cross-sectional research; in this article we present the findings from a 2½-year 
longitudinal study of 277 6- to-13-year-olds. On three occasions, speed of 
information processing was assessed with Visual Matching and Cross Out; WM was 
assessed with reading, listening, backward digit, alphabet, and operation span 
tasks; and nonverbal reasoning was assessed with Raven's progressive matrices. 
The results provided consistent evidence of direct links from processing speed 
to reasoning but inconsistent evidence for indirect links from speed to WM to 
reasoning. These findings suggest that variations in processing speed may 
constrain the development of reasoning, directly and perhaps indirectly. A video 
abstract of this article can be viewed at: https://youtu.be/nc0VlFdi468.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12352
PMCID: PMC4860185
PMID: 26537631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1100. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):999-1010. doi: 10.1111/desc.12345. Epub 2015 Sep 22.

Challenging gender stereotypes: Theory of mind and peer group dynamics.

Mulvey KL(1), Rizzo MT(2), Killen M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Educational Studies, University of South Carolina, USA. 
mulveykl@mailbox.sc.edu.
(2)Department of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology, University of 
Maryland, USA.

To investigate the social cognitive skills related to challenging gender 
stereotypes, children (N = 61, 3-6 years) evaluated a peer who challenged gender 
stereotypic norms held by the peer's group. Participants with false belief 
theory of mind (FB ToM) competence were more likely than participants who did 
not have FB ToM to expect a peer to challenge the group's stereotypes and 
propose that the group engage in a non-stereotypic activity. Further, 
participants with FB ToM rated challenging the peer group more positively. 
Participants without FB ToM did not differentiate between their own and the 
group's evaluation of challenges to the group's stereotypic norms, but those 
with ToM competence asserted that they would be more supportive of challenging 
the group norm than would the peer group. Results reveal the importance of 
social-cognitive competencies for recognizing the legitimacy of challenging 
stereotypes, and for understanding one's own and other group perspectives.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12345
PMCID: PMC4808471
PMID: 26395753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1101. Dev Sci. 2017 Sep;20(5):10.1111/desc.12471. doi: 10.1111/desc.12471. Epub 2016 
Oct 17.

Longitudinal stability of pre-reading skill profiles of kindergarten children: 
implications for early screening and theories of reading.

Ozernov-Palchik O(1)(2)(3), Norton ES(4)(2)(5), Sideridis G(3)(6), Beach 
SD(2)(5)(6), Wolf M(1), Gabrieli JDE(2)(5), Gaab N(3)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Eliot-Pearson Department of Child Study and Human Development, Tufts 
University, USA.
(2)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, USA.
(3)Laboratories of Cognitive Neuroscience, Division of Developmental Medicine, 
Department of Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, USA.
(4)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northwestern University, 
USA.
(5)McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
USA.
(6)Harvard Medical School, USA.
(7)Harvard Graduate School of Education, USA.

Research suggests that early identification of developmental dyslexia is 
important for mitigating the negative effects of dyslexia, including reduced 
educational attainment and increased socioemotional difficulties. The strongest 
pre-literacy predictors of dyslexia are rapid automatized naming (RAN), 
phonological awareness (PA), letter knowledge, and verbal short-term memory. The 
relationship among these constructs has been debated, and several theories have 
emerged to explain the unique role of each in reading ability/disability. 
Furthermore, the stability of identification of risk based on these measures 
varies widely across studies, due in part to the different cut-offs employed to 
designate risk. We applied a latent profile analysis technique with a diverse 
sample of 1215 kindergarten and pre-kindergarten students from 20 schools, to 
investigate whether PA, RAN, letter knowledge, and verbal short-term memory 
measures differentiated between homogenous profiles of performance on these 
measures. Six profiles of performance emerged from the data: average performers, 
below average performers, high performers, PA risk, RAN risk, and double-deficit 
risk (both PA and RAN). A latent class regression model was employed to 
investigate the longitudinal stability of these groups in a representative 
subset of children (n = 95) nearly two years later, at the end of 1st grade. 
Profile membership in the spring semester of pre-kindergarten or fall semester 
of kindergarten was significantly predictive of later reading performance, with 
the specific patterns of performance on the different constructs remaining 
stable across the years. There was a higher frequency of PA and RAN deficits in 
children from lower socioeconomic status (SES) backgrounds. There was no 
evidence for the IQ-achievement discrepancy criterion traditionally used to 
diagnose dyslexia. Our results support the feasibility of early identification 
of dyslexia risk and point to the heterogeneity of risk profiles. These findings 
carry important implications for improving outcomes for children with dyslexia, 
based on more targeted interventions.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12471
PMCID: PMC5393968
PMID: 27747988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1102. Dev Sci. 2017 Nov;20(6). doi: 10.1111/desc.12463. Epub 2016 Oct 16.

Children's initial sleep-associated changes in motor skill are unrelated to 
long-term skill levels.

Zinke K(1), Wilhelm I(2), Bayramoglu M(1), Klein S(1), Born J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Psychology and Behavioral Neurobiology, University of 
Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Children's Hospital, University of Zürich, Switzerland.

Sleep is considered to support the formation of skill memory. In juvenile but 
not adult song birds learning a tutor's song, a stronger initial deterioration 
of song performance over night-sleep predicts better song performance in the 
long run. This and similar observations have stimulated the view of sleep 
supporting skill formation during development in an unsupervised off-line 
learning process that, in the absence of external feedback, can initially also 
enhance inaccuracies in skill performance. Here we explored whether in children 
learning a motor sequence task, as in song-learning juvenile birds, changes 
across sleep after initial practice predict performance levels achieved in the 
long run. The task was a serial reaction time task (SRTT) where subjects had to 
press buttons which were lighted up in a repeating eight-element sequence as 
fast as possible. Twenty-five children (8-12 years) practised the task in the 
evening before nocturnal sleep which was recorded polysomnographically. 
Retrieval was tested on the following morning and again 1 week later after daily 
training on the SRTT. As expected, changes in response speed over the initial 
night of sleep were negatively correlated with final performance speed after the 
1-week training. However, unlike in song birds, this correlation was driven by 
the baseline speed level achieved before sleep. Baseline-corrected changes in 
speed or variability over the initial sleep period did not predict final 
performance on the trained SRTT sequence, or on different sequences introduced 
to assess generalization of the trained behaviour. The lack of correlation 
between initial sleep-dependent changes and long-term performance might reflect 
that the children were too experienced for the simple SRTT, possibly also 
favouring ceiling effects in performance. A consistent association found between 
sleep spindle activity and explicit sequence knowledge alternatively suggests 
that the expected correlation was masked by explicit memory systems interacting 
with skill memory formation.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12463
PMID: 27747974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1103. Dev Sci. 2017 Nov;20(6):e12457. doi: 10.1111/desc.12457. Epub 2016 Sep 22.

Difficulties in auditory organization as a cause of reading backwardness? An 
auditory neuroscience perspective.

Leong V(1)(2), Goswami U(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Neuroscience in Education, Department of Psychology, University of 
Cambridge, UK.
(2)Division of Psychology, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.

Over 30 years ago, it was suggested that difficulties in the 'auditory 
organization' of word forms in the mental lexicon might cause reading 
difficulties. It was proposed that children used parameters such as rhyme and 
alliteration to organize word forms in the mental lexicon by acoustic 
similarity, and that such organization was impaired in developmental dyslexia. 
This literature was based on an 'oddity' measure of children's sensitivity to 
rhyme (e.g. wood, book, good) and alliteration (e.g. sun, sock, rag). The 
'oddity' task revealed that children with dyslexia were significantly poorer at 
identifying the 'odd word out' than younger children without reading 
difficulties. Here we apply a novel modelling approach drawn from auditory 
neuroscience to study the possible sensory basis of the auditory organization of 
rhyming and non-rhyming words by children. We utilize a novel Spectral-Amplitude 
Modulation Phase Hierarchy (S-AMPH) approach to analysing the spectro-temporal 
structure of rhyming and non-rhyming words, aiming to illuminate the potential 
acoustic cues used by children as a basis for phonological organization. The 
S-AMPH model assumes that speech encoding depends on neuronal oscillatory 
entrainment to the amplitude modulation (AM) hierarchy in speech. Our results 
suggest that phonological similarity between rhyming words in the oddity task 
depends crucially on slow (delta band) modulations in the speech envelope. 
Contrary to linguistic assumptions, therefore, auditory organization by children 
may not depend on phonemic information for this task. Linguistically, it is 
assumed that 'book' does not rhyme with 'wood' and 'good' because the final 
phoneme differs. However, our auditory analysis suggests that the acoustic cues 
to this phonological dissimilarity depend primarily on the slower amplitude 
modulations in the speech envelope, thought to carry prosodic information. 
Therefore, the oddity task may help in detecting reading difficulties because 
phonological similarity judgements about rhyme reflect sensitivity to slow 
amplitude modulation patterns. Slower amplitude modulations are known to be 
detected less efficiently by children with dyslexia.

© 2016 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12457
PMCID: PMC5697577
PMID: 27659413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1104. Dev Sci. 2017 Nov;20(6). doi: 10.1111/desc.12468. Epub 2016 Sep 21.

Visual attention and academic performance in children with developmental 
disabilities and behavioural attention deficits.

Kirk HE(1)(2), Gray K(3), Riby DM(4), Taffe J(3), Cornish KM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychological Sciences, Monash University, Australia.
(2)Monash Institute of Cognitive and Clinical Neuroscience, Australia.
(3)Centre for Developmental Psychology & Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry, 
School of Clinical Sciences, Monash University, Australia.
(4)Department of Psychology, Durham University, UK.

Despite well-documented attention deficits in children with intellectual and 
developmental disabilities (IDD), distinctions across types of attention 
problems and their association with academic attainment has not been fully 
explored. This study examines visual attention capacities and 
inattentive/hyperactive behaviours in 77 children aged 4 to 11 years with IDD 
and elevated behavioural attention difficulties. Children with autism spectrum 
disorder (ASD; n = 23), Down syndrome (DS; n = 22), and non-specific 
intellectual disability (NSID; n = 32) completed computerized visual search and 
vigilance paradigms. In addition, parents and teachers completed rating scales 
of inattention and hyperactivity. Concurrent associations between attention 
abilities and early literacy and numeracy skills were also examined. Children 
completed measures of receptive vocabulary, phonological abilities and 
cardinality skills. As expected, the results indicated that all groups had 
relatively comparable levels of inattentive/hyperactive behaviours as rated by 
parents and teachers. However, the extent of visual attention deficits varied as 
a result of group; namely children with DS had poorer visual search and 
vigilance abilities than children with ASD and NSID. Further, significant 
associations between visual attention difficulties and poorer literacy and 
numeracy skills were observed, regardless of group. Collectively the findings 
demonstrate that in children with IDD who present with homogenous behavioural 
attention difficulties, at the cognitive level, subtle profiles of attentional 
problems can be delineated.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12468
PMID: 27649816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1105. Dev Sci. 2017 Sep;20(5):e12435. doi: 10.1111/desc.12435. Epub 2016 Aug 6.

Children on the autism spectrum update their behaviour in response to a volatile 
environment.

Manning C(1), Kilner J(2), Neil L(3), Karaminis T(3), Pellicano E(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, UK.
(2)Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, UCL Institute of Neurology, 
University College London, UK.
(3)Centre for Research in Autism and Education (CRAE), UCL Institute of 
Education, University College London, UK.
(4)School of Psychology, University of Western Australia, Australia.

Typical adults can track reward probabilities across trials to estimate the 
volatility of the environment and use this information to modify their learning 
rate (Behrens et al., 2007). In a stable environment, it is advantageous to take 
account of outcomes over many trials, whereas in a volatile environment, recent 
experience should be more strongly weighted than distant experience. Recent 
predictive coding accounts of autism propose that autistic individuals will 
demonstrate atypical updating of their behaviour in response to the statistics 
of the reward environment. To rigorously test this hypothesis, we administered a 
developmentally appropriate version of Behrens et al.'s (2007) task to 34 
cognitively able children on the autism spectrum aged between 6 and 14 years, 32 
age- and ability-matched typically developing children and 19 typical adults. 
Participants were required to choose between a green and a blue pirate chest, 
each associated with a randomly determined reward value between 0 and 100 
points, with a combined total of 100 points. On each trial, the reward was given 
for one stimulus only. In the stable condition, the ratio of the blue or green 
response being rewarded was fixed at 75:25. In the volatile condition, the ratio 
alternated between 80:20 and 20:80 every 20 trials. We estimated the learning 
rate for each participant by fitting a delta rule model and compared this rate 
across conditions and groups. All groups increased their learning rate in the 
volatile condition compared to the stable condition. Unexpectedly, there was no 
effect of group and no interaction between group and condition. Thus, autistic 
children used information about the statistics of the reward environment to 
guide their decisions to a similar extent as typically developing children and 
adults. These results help constrain predictive coding accounts of autism by 
demonstrating that autism is not characterized by uniform differences in the 
weighting of prediction error.

© 2016 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12435
PMCID: PMC5600083
PMID: 27496590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1106. Dev Sci. 2017 Sep;20(5):10.1111/desc.12434. doi: 10.1111/desc.12434. Epub 2016 
Aug 6.

Genetic and environmental influences on early literacy skills across school 
grade contexts.

Haughbrook R(1), Hart SA(1)(2), Schatschneider C(1)(2), Taylor J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Florida State University, USA.
(2)Florida Center for Reading Research, USA.

Recent research suggests that the etiology of reading achievement can differ 
across environmental contexts. In the US, schools are commonly assigned grades 
(e.g. 'A', 'B') often interpreted to indicate school quality. This study 
explored differences in the etiology of early literacy skills for students based 
on these school grades. Participants included twins drawn from the Florida Twin 
Project on Reading (n = 1313 pairs) aged 4 to 10 years during the 2006-07 school 
year. Early literacy skills were assessed with DIBELS subtests: Oral Reading 
Fluency (ORF), Nonsense Word Fluency (NWF), Initial Sound Fluency (ISF), Letter 
Naming Fluency (LNF), and Phoneme Segmentation Fluency (PSF). School grade data 
were retrieved from the Florida Department of Education. Multi-group analyses 
were conducted separately for subsamples defined by 'A' or 'non-A' schools, 
controlling for school-level socioeconomic status. Results indicated significant 
etiological differences on pre-reading skills (ISF, LNF, and PSF), but not 
word-level reading skills (ORF and NWF). There was a consistent trend of greater 
environmental influences on pre-reading skills in non-A schools, arguably 
representing 'poorer' environmental contexts than the A schools. Importantly, 
this is the case outside of resources linked with school-level SES, indicating 
that something about the direct environment on pre-reading skills in the non-A 
school context is more variable than for A schools.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12434
PMCID: PMC5293682
PMID: 27496364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1107. Dev Sci. 2016 Jul;19(4):686-95. doi: 10.1111/desc.12443.

Altered functional connectivity of the default mode network in Williams 
syndrome: a multimodal approach.

Sampaio A(1), Moreira PS(2)(3), Osório A(1)(4), Magalhães R(2)(3), Vasconcelos 
C(5), Férnandez M(6), Carracedo A(6), Alegria J(1), Gonçalves ÓF(1)(7)(8), 
Soares JM(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Neuropsychophysiology Lab, CIPsi, School of Psychology, University of Minho, 
Portugal.
(2)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health 
Sciences, University of Minho, Portugal.
(3)ICVS/3B's - PT Government Associate Laboratory, Braga/Guimarães, Portugal.
(4)Social and Cognitive Neuroscience Lab, Post-Graduate Program on Developmental 
Disorders - Center for Biological and Health Sciences, Mackenzie Presbyterian 
University, São Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Department of Neuroradiology, CHP - Hospital Santo António, Porto, Portugal.
(6)Genetic Molecular Unit, Galician Public Foundation of Genomic Medicine, 
University of Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(7)Spaulding Neuromodulation Center, Department of Physical Medicine & 
Rehabilitation, Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital and Massachusetts General 
Hospital, USA.
(8)Department of Applied Psychology, Bouvé College of Health Sciences, 
Northeastern University, USA.

Resting state brain networks are implicated in a variety of relevant brain 
functions. Importantly, abnormal patterns of functional connectivity (FC) have 
been reported in several neurodevelopmental disorders. In particular, the 
Default Mode Network (DMN) has been found to be associated with social 
cognition. We hypothesize that the DMN may be altered in Williams syndrome (WS), 
a neurodevelopmental genetic disorder characterized by an unique cognitive and 
behavioral phenotype. In this study, we assessed the architecture of the DMN 
using fMRI in WS patients and typically developing matched controls (sex and 
age) in terms of FC and volumetry of the DMN. Moreover, we complemented the 
analysis with a functional connectome approach. After excluding participants due 
to movement artifacts (n = 3), seven participants with WS and their respective 
matched controls were included in the analyses. A decreased FC between the DMN 
regions was observed in the WS group when compared with the typically developing 
group. Specifically, we found a decreased FC in a posterior hub of the DMN 
including the precuneus, calcarine and the posterior cingulate of the left 
hemisphere. The functional connectome approach showed a focalized and global 
increased FC connectome in the WS group. The reduced FC of the posterior hub of 
the DMN in the WS group is consistent with immaturity of the brain FC patterns 
and may be associated with the singularity of their visual spatial phenotype.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12443
PMID: 27412230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1108. Dev Sci. 2016 Jul;19(4):524-49. doi: 10.1111/desc.12467.

A theoretical rut: revisiting and critically evaluating the generalized 
under/over-connectivity hypothesis of autism.

Picci G(1), Gotts SJ(1), Scherf KS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Pennsylvania State University, USA.

In 2004, two papers proposed that pervasive functional under-connectivity (Just 
et al., ) or a trade-off between excessive local connectivity at the cost of 
distal under-connectivity (Belmonte et al., ) characterizes atypical brain 
organization in autism. Here, we take stock of the most recent and rigorous 
functional and structural connectivity findings with a careful eye toward 
evaluating the extent to which they support these original hypotheses. Indeed, 
the empirical data do not support them. From rsfMRI studies in adolescents and 
adults, there is an emerging consensus regarding long-range functional 
connections indicating cortico-cortical under-connectivity, specifically 
involving the temporal lobes, combined with subcortical-cortical 
over-connectivity. In contrast, there is little to no consensus regarding local 
functional connectivity or findings from task-based functional connectivity 
studies. The structural connectivity data suggest that white matter tracts are 
pervasively weak, particularly in the temporal lobe. Together, these findings 
are revealing how deeply complex the story is regarding atypical neural network 
organization in autism. In other words, distance and strength of connectivity as 
individual factors or as interacting factors do not consistently explain the 
patterns of atypical neural connectivity in autism. Therefore, we make several 
methodological recommendations and highlight developmental considerations that 
will help researchers in the field cultivate new hypotheses about the nature and 
mechanisms of potentially aberrant functional and structural connectivity in 
autism.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12467
PMID: 27412228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1109. Dev Sci. 2017 Mar;20(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12396. Epub 2016 Jun 30.

How do generic statements impact performance? Evidence for entity beliefs.

Park D(1), Schaeffer MW(2), Nolla KM(3), Levine SC(2), Beilock SL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Welfare, Chungbuk National University, Korea.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, USA.

Generic statements about the abilities of children's social groups (e.g. 
'Girls/Boys are good at this game') negatively impact children's performance - 
even if the statements are favorable towards children's own social groups. We 
explored the mechanism by which generic language impairs children's performance. 
Across three studies, our findings suggest that generic statements influence 
children's performance by creating an entity belief (i.e. a belief that a fixed 
ability determines performance). Children who were exposed to a generic 
statement about their social group's ability performed worse than children in 
control conditions. This effect hurt children's performance even when the person 
who made the generic statement was no longer present and a new person not privy 
to the statement replaced them. However, when children heard a generic statement 
paired with an effort explanation (i.e. 'Girls/Boys are good at this game 
because they try really hard when they draw') they performed better than 
children who heard the generic statement with no explanation (i.e. just 
'Girls/Boys are good at this game') and children who heard the generic statement 
paired with a trait explanation (i.e. 'Girls/Boys are good at this game because 
they are smart and really good at drawing'). This work uncovers when and how 
generic statements that refer to the ability of one's social group hinder 
performance, informing the development of practices to improve student 
motivation and learning.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12396
PMID: 27365144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1110. Dev Sci. 2016 Jul;19(4):657-72. doi: 10.1111/desc.12440. Epub 2016 Jun 19.

Aberrant topologies and reconfiguration pattern of functional brain network in 
children with second language reading impairment.

Liu L(1), Li H(1), Zhang M(2), Wang Z(2), Wei N(1), Liu L(1), Meng X(2)(3), Ding 
G(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal 
University, PR, China.
(2)School of Psychological and Cognitive Science, Beijing Key Laboratory of 
Behavior and Mental Health, Peking University, PR, China.
(3)The Joint PekingU-PolyU Center for Child Development and Learning, PR, China.

Prior work has extensively studied neural deficits in children with reading 
impairment (RI) in their native language but has rarely examined those of RI 
children in their second language (L2). A recent study revealed that the 
function of the local brain regions was disrupted in children with RI in L2, but 
it is not clear whether the disruption also occurs at a large-scale brain 
network level. Using fMRI and graph theoretical analysis, we explored the 
topology of the whole-brain functional network during a phonological rhyming 
task and network reconfigurations across task and short resting phases in 
Chinese children with English reading impairment versus age-matched typically 
developing (TD) children. We found that, when completing the phonological task, 
the RI group exhibited higher local network efficiency and network modularity 
compared with the TD group. When switching between the phonological task and the 
short resting phase, the RI group showed difficulty with network 
reconfiguration, as reflected in fewer changes in the local efficiency and 
modularity properties and less rearrangement of the modular communities. These 
findings were reproducible after controlling for the effects of in-scanner 
accuracy, participant gender, and L1 reading performance. The results from the 
whole-brain network analyses were largely replicated in the task-activated 
network. These findings provide preliminary evidence supporting that RI in L2 is 
associated with not only abnormal functional network organization but also poor 
flexibility of the neural system in responding to changing cognitive demands.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12440
PMID: 27321248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1111. Dev Sci. 2017 Jan;20(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12433. Epub 2016 Jun 19.

Bilingual children's long-term outcomes in English as a second language: 
language environment factors shape individual differences in catching up with 
monolinguals.

Paradis J(1), Jia R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Linguistics, University of Alberta, Canada.

Bilingual children experience more variation in their language environment than 
monolingual children and this impacts their rate of language development with 
respect to monolinguals. How long it takes for bilingual children learning 
English as a second language (L2) to display similar abilities to monolingual 
age-peers has been estimated to be 4-6 years, but conflicting findings suggest 
that even 6 years in school is not enough. Most studies on long-term L2 
development have focused on just one linguistic sub-domain, vocabulary, and have 
not included multiple individual difference factors. For the present study, 
Chinese first language-English L2 children were given standardized measures of 
vocabulary, grammar and global comprehension every year from 4 ½ to 6 ½ years of 
English in school (ages 8½ to 10½); language environment factors were obtained 
through an extensive parent questionnaire. Children converged on monolingual 
norms differentially according to the test, with the majority of children 
reaching monolingual levels of performance on the majority of tests by 5 ½ years 
of English exposure. Individual differences in outcomes were predicted by length 
of English exposure, mother's education, mother's English fluency, child's use 
of English in the home, richness/quality of the English input outside school and 
age of arrival in Canada. In sum, the timeframe for bilinguals to catch up to 
monolinguals depends on linguistic sub-domain, task difficulty and on individual 
children's language environment, making 4-6 years an approximate estimate only. 
This study also shows that language environment factors shape not only 
early-stage but also late-stage bilingual development.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12433
PMID: 27320539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1112. Dev Sci. 2017 May;20(3). doi: 10.1111/desc.12417. Epub 2016 Jun 2.

Preschoolers' generosity increases with understanding of the affective benefits 
of sharing.

Paulus M(1), Moore C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Psychology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität 
München, Germany.
(2)Department of Psychology, Dalhousie University, Canada.

Research has demonstrated that sharing with others is rewarding, suggesting a 
proximal mechanism of humans' extraordinary tendency to engage in prosocial 
behavior. The current study explored the cognitive basis of the relation between 
generosity and happiness early in ontogeny. We demonstrate that preschool 
children understand the relation between generosity and happiness. Moreover, our 
results show that children's emotion ratings are predictive for their subsequent 
sharing behavior. This finding provides evidence for the theoretical claim that 
prosocial behavior may be related to the anticipation of positive feelings, and 
that this mechanism may explain early instances of generosity in preschool 
children.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12417
PMID: 27256161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1113. Dev Sci. 2017 Jul;20(4). doi: 10.1111/desc.12409. Epub 2016 Jun 2.

Specialization of the motor system in infancy: from broad tuning to selectively 
specialized purposeful actions.

D'Souza H(1), Cowie D(2), Karmiloff-Smith A(3), Bremner AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Sensorimotor Development Research Unit, Department of Psychology, Goldsmiths, 
University of London, UK.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Durham, UK.
(3)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Department of Psychological 
Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London, UK.

In executing purposeful actions, adults select sufficient and necessary limbs. 
But infants often move goal-irrelevant limbs, suggesting a developmental process 
of motor specialization. Two experiments with 9- and 12-month-olds revealed 
gradual decreases in extraneous movements in non-acting limbs during unimanual 
actions. In Experiment 1, 9-month-olds produced more extraneous movements in the 
non-acting hand/arm and feet/legs than 12-month-olds. In Experiment 2, analysis 
of the spatiotemporal dynamics of infants' movements revealed developmental 
declines in the spatiotemporal coupling of movements between acting and 
non-acting arms. We also showed that the degree of specialization in infants' 
unimanual actions is associated with individual differences in motor experience 
and visual attention, indicating the experience-dependent and broad functional 
nature of these developmental changes. Our study provides important new insights 
into motor development: as in cognitive domains, motor behaviours are initially 
broadly tuned to their goal, becoming progressively specialized during the first 
year of life.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12409
PMID: 27255936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1114. Dev Sci. 2017 Jan;20(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12419. Epub 2016 May 4.

Segmenting words from fluent speech during infancy - challenges and 
opportunities in a bilingual context.

Polka L(1)(2), Orena AJ(1)(2), Sundara M(3), Worrall J(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Communication Sciences & Disorders, McGill University, Canada.
(2)Centre for Research on Brain, Language and Music, McGill University, Canada.
(3)Department of Linguistics, University of California, Los Angeles, USA.

Previous research shows that word segmentation is a language-specific skill. 
Here, we tested segmentation of bi-syllabic words in two languages (French; 
English) within the same infants in a single test session. In Experiment 1, 
monolingual 8-month-olds (French; English) segmented bi-syllabic words in their 
native language, but not in an unfamiliar and rhythmically different language. 
In Experiment 2, bilingual infants acquiring French and English demonstrated 
successful segmentation for French when it was tested first, but not for English 
and not for either language when tested second. There were no effects of 
language exposure on this pattern of findings. In Experiment 3, bilingual 
infants segmented the same English materials used in Experiment 2 when they were 
tested using the standard segmentation procedure, which provided more exposure 
to the test stimuli. These findings show that segmenting words in both their 
native languages in the dual-language task poses a distinct challenge for 
bilingual 8-month-olds acquiring French and English. Further research exploring 
early word segmentation will advance our understanding of bilingual acquisition 
and expand our fundamental knowledge of language and cognitive development.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12419
PMID: 27146860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1115. Dev Sci. 2017 Jul;20(4). doi: 10.1111/desc.12418. Epub 2016 May 4.

Representations of numerical and non-numerical magnitude both contribute to 
mathematical competence in children.

Lourenco SF(1), Bonny JW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Emory University, USA.

A growing body of evidence suggests that non-symbolic representations of number, 
which humans share with nonhuman animals, are functionally related to uniquely 
human mathematical thought. Other research suggesting that numerical and 
non-numerical magnitudes not only share analog format but also form part of a 
general magnitude system raises questions about whether the non-symbolic basis 
of mathematical thinking is unique to numerical magnitude. Here we examined this 
issue in 5- and 6-year-old children using comparison tasks of non-symbolic 
number arrays and cumulative area as well as standardized tests of math 
competence. One set of findings revealed that scores on both magnitude 
comparison tasks were modulated by ratio, consistent with shared analog format. 
Moreover, scores on these tasks were moderately correlated, suggesting overlap 
in the precision of numerical and non-numerical magnitudes, as expected under a 
general magnitude system. Another set of findings revealed that the precision of 
both types of magnitude contributed shared and unique variance to the same math 
measures (e.g. calculation and geometry), after accounting for age and verbal 
competence. These findings argue against an exclusive role for non-symbolic 
number in supporting early mathematical understanding. Moreover, they suggest 
that mathematical understanding may be rooted in a general system of magnitude 
representation that is not specific to numerical magnitude but that also 
encompasses non-numerical magnitude.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12418
PMID: 27146696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1116. Dev Sci. 2017 Jul;20(4). doi: 10.1111/desc.12403. Epub 2016 May 4.

The development of generosity and moral cognition across five cultures.

Cowell JM(1), Lee K(2), Malcolm-Smith S(3), Selcuk B(4), Zhou X(5), Decety J(1).

Author information:
(1)The Child Neurosuite - Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, USA.
(2)Erick Jackman Institute of Child Study, University of Toronto, Canada.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Cape Town, South Africa.
(4)Department of Psychology, Koc University, Turkey.
(5)Department of Psychology, Sun-Yat Sen University, China.

Morality is an evolved aspect of human nature, yet is heavily influenced by 
cultural environment. This developmental study adopted an integrative approach 
by combining measures of socioeconomic status (SES), executive function, 
affective sharing, empathic concern, theory of mind, and moral judgment in 
predicting sharing behavior in children (N = 999) from the age of 5 to 12 in 
five large-scale societies: Canada, China, Turkey, South Africa, and the USA. 
Results demonstrate that age, gender, SES, culture, and social cognitive 
mechanisms explain over 20% of the variance worldwide in children's resource 
allocation. These findings are discussed in reference to standard cultural 
comparisons (individualist/collectivist), as well as the degree of market 
integration, and highlight continuities and discontinuities in children's 
generosity across urban contexts.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12403
PMID: 27146417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1117. Dev Sci. 2017 May;20(3):10.1111/desc.12375. doi: 10.1111/desc.12375. Epub 2016 
Apr 18.

To trust or not to trust: social decision-making in post-institutionalized, 
internationally adopted youth.

Pitula CE(1), Wenner JA(1), Gunnar MR(1), Thomas KM(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Child Development, University of Minnesota, USA.

Chronic parental maltreatment has been associated with lower levels of 
interpersonal trust, and depriving environments have been shown to predict 
short-sighted, risk-averse decision-making. The present study examined whether a 
circumscribed period of adverse care occurring only early in life was associated 
with biases in trust behavior. Fifty-three post-institutionalized (PI) youth, 
adopted internationally on average by 1 year of age, and 33 
never-institutionalized, non-adopted youth (Mage  = 12.9 years) played a trust 
game. Participants decided whether or not to share coins with a different 
anonymous peer in each trial with the potential to receive a larger number of 
coins in return. Trials were presented in blocks that varied in the degree to 
which the peers behaved in a trustworthy (reciprocal) or untrustworthy 
(non-reciprocal) manner. A comparison condition consisted of a computerized 
lottery with the same choices and probabilistic risk as the peer trials. 
Non-adopted comparison youth showed a tendency to share more with peers than to 
invest in the lottery and tended to maintain their level of sharing across 
trials despite experiencing trials in which peers failed to reciprocate. In 
contrast, PI children, particularly those who were adopted over 1 year of age, 
shared less with peers than they invested in the lottery and quickly adapted 
their sharing behavior to peers' responses. These results suggest that PI youth 
were more mistrusting, more sensitive to both defection and reciprocation, and 
potentially more accurate in their trusting decisions than comparison youth. 
Results support the presence of a sensitive period for the development of trust 
in others, whereby conditions early in life may set long-term biases in 
decision-making.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12375
PMCID: PMC5069074
PMID: 27089448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1118. Dev Sci. 2017 May;20(3):10.1111/desc.12410. doi: 10.1111/desc.12410. Epub 2016 
Apr 7.

Infant learning is influenced by local spurious generalizations.

Gerken L(1), Quam C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The University of Arizona, USA.

In previous work, 11-month-old infants were able to learn rules about the 
relation of the consonants in CVCV words from just four examples. The rules 
involved phonetic feature relations (same voicing or same place of 
articulation), and infants' learning was impeded when pairs of words allowed 
alternative possible generalizations (e.g. two words both contained the specific 
consonants p and t). Experiment 1 asked whether a small number of such spurious 
generalizations found in a randomly ordered list of 24 different words would 
also impede learning. It did - infants showed no sign of learning the rule. To 
ask whether it was the overall set of words or their order that prevented 
learning, Experiment 2 reordered the words to avoid local spurious 
generalizations. Infants showed robust learning. Infants thus appear to 
entertain spurious generalizations based on small, local subsets of stimuli. The 
results support a characterization of infants as incremental rather than batch 
learners.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12410
PMCID: PMC5055404
PMID: 27061339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1119. Dev Sci. 2017 Jan;20(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12427. Epub 2016 Apr 4.

Speech discrimination in 11-month-old bilingual and monolingual infants: a 
magnetoencephalography study.

Ferjan Ramírez N(1), Ramírez RR(1), Clarke M(1), Taulu S(1)(2), Kuhl PK(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Learning & Brain Sciences, University of Washington, USA.
(2)Department of Physics, University of Washington, USA.
(3)Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences, University of Washington, USA.

Language experience shapes infants' abilities to process speech sounds, with 
universal phonetic discrimination abilities narrowing in the second half of the 
first year. Brain measures reveal a corresponding change in neural 
discrimination as the infant brain becomes selectively sensitive to its native 
language(s). Whether and how bilingual experience alters the transition to 
native language specific phonetic discrimination is important both theoretically 
and from a practical standpoint. Using whole head magnetoencephalography (MEG), 
we examined brain responses to Spanish and English syllables in Spanish-English 
bilingual and English monolingual 11-month-old infants. Monolingual infants 
showed sensitivity to English, while bilingual infants were sensitive to both 
languages. Neural responses indicate that the dual sensitivity of the bilingual 
brain is achieved by a slower transition from acoustic to phonetic sound 
analysis, an adaptive and advantageous response to increased variability in 
language input. Bilingual neural responses extend into the prefrontal and 
orbitofrontal cortex, which may be related to their previously described 
bilingual advantage in executive function skills. A video abstract of this 
article can be viewed at: https://youtu.be/TAYhj-gekqw.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12427
PMID: 27041494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1120. Dev Sci. 2017 Mar;20(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12416. Epub 2016 Mar 6.

Rattling the cage and opening the door.

Heyes C(1).

Author information:
(1)All Souls College & Department of Experimental Psychology, University of 
Oxford, UK.

Comment on
    Dev Sci. 2017 Mar;20(2):null.
    Dev Sci. 2017 Mar;20(2):

I share with Poulin-Dubois and with Sabbagh, Koenig and Kuhlmeier the conviction 
that more research is needed on the mechanisms supporting selective social 
learning in infants and children. However, my plea is more specific: for 
research that tests domain-specific hypotheses about mechanism against 
domain-general hypotheses derived from other fields of cognitive science. Many, 
but not all, of these alternative hypotheses relate to domain-general mechanisms 
of attention.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12416
PMID: 26946970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1121. Dev Sci. 2017 Jul;20(4). doi: 10.1111/desc.12392. Epub 2016 Feb 21.

Monolingual and bilingual children's social preferences for monolingual and 
bilingual speakers.

Byers-Heinlein K(1), Behrend DA(2), Said LM(1), Girgis H(2), Poulin-Dubois D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Concordia University, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychological Science, University of Arkansas, USA.

Past research has shown that young monolingual children exhibit language-based 
social biases: they prefer native language to foreign language speakers. The 
current research investigated how children's language preferences are influenced 
by their own bilingualism and by a speaker's bilingualism. Monolingual and 
bilingual 4- to 6-year-olds heard pairs of adults (a monolingual and a 
bilingual, or two monolinguals) and chose the person with whom they wanted to be 
friends. Whether they were from a largely monolingual or a largely bilingual 
community, monolingual children preferred monolingual to bilingual speakers, and 
native language to foreign language speakers. In contrast, bilingual children 
showed similar affiliation with monolingual and bilingual speakers, as well as 
for monolingual speakers using their dominant versus non-dominant language. 
Exploratory analyses showed that individual bilinguals displayed idiosyncratic 
patterns of preference. These results reveal that language-based preferences 
emerge from a complex interaction of factors, including preference for in-group 
members, avoidance of out-group members, and characteristics of the child as 
they relate to the status of the languages within the community. Moreover, these 
results have implications for bilingual children's social acceptance by their 
peers.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12392
PMID: 26898859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1122. Dev Sci. 2017 Jan;20(1):10.1111/desc.12408. doi: 10.1111/desc.12408. Epub 2016 
Feb 14.

Interactions between levels of attention ability and levels of bilingualism in 
children's executive functioning.

Sorge GB(1), Toplak ME(2), Bialystok E(2).

Author information:
(1)York Catholic District School Board, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology, York University, Canada.

Attention difficulty is associated with poor performance on executive 
functioning (EF) tasks, yet EF is enhanced in bilingual children. However, no 
research to date has investigated the possible interaction between bilingualism 
and attention ability in children to determine the consequences for EF when both 
are present. We assessed a sample of typically developing children who were 8 to 
11 years old for their ability in attention control and level of bilingualism on 
the basis of questionnaires completed by parents and teachers. Children 
performed three tasks requiring aspects of EF: stop signal task (inhibition), 
flanker task (interference control), and frogs matrices task (spatial working 
memory). Results from hierarchical regressions confirmed that both attention 
ability and bilingualism contributed to performance on the EF tasks. Where 
interaction effects were significant, they showed that attention ability was a 
stronger predictor for an inhibition task, namely stop signal, and bilingualism 
a stronger predictor for an interference task, namely flanker. Furthermore, 
these results allow us to discuss the relation between EF and attention ability.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12408
PMCID: PMC4983538
PMID: 26875024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1123. Dev Sci. 2016 Jul;19(4):581-98. doi: 10.1111/desc.12407. Epub 2016 Feb 1.

Multivariate pattern classification of pediatric Tourette syndrome using 
functional connectivity MRI.

Greene DJ(1)(2), Church JA(3), Dosenbach NU(4), Nielsen AN(4), Adeyemo B(4), 
Nardos B(4), Petersen SE(2)(4)(5), Black KJ(1)(2)(4)(5), Schlaggar 
BL(1)(2)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology, Washington University School of Medicine, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, The University of Texas at Austin, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, USA.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, Washington University School of Medicine, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, USA.

Tourette syndrome (TS) is a developmental neuropsychiatric disorder 
characterized by motor and vocal tics. Individuals with TS would benefit greatly 
from advances in prediction of symptom timecourse and treatment effectiveness. 
As a first step, we applied a multivariate method - support vector machine (SVM) 
classification - to test whether patterns in brain network activity, measured 
with resting state functional connectivity (RSFC) MRI, could predict diagnostic 
group membership for individuals. RSFC data from 42 children with TS (8-15 yrs) 
and 42 unaffected controls (age, IQ, in-scanner movement matched) were included. 
While univariate tests identified no significant group differences, SVM 
classified group membership with ~70% accuracy (p < .001). We also report a 
novel adaptation of SVM binary classification that, in addition to an overall 
accuracy rate for the SVM, provides a confidence measure for the accurate 
classification of each individual. Our results support the contention that 
multivariate methods can better capture the complexity of some brain disorders, 
and hold promise for predicting prognosis and treatment outcome for individuals 
with TS.

© 2016 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12407
PMCID: PMC4945470
PMID: 26834084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1124. Dev Sci. 2017 May;20(3). doi: 10.1111/desc.12385. Epub 2016 Jan 29.

Developmental bias for number words in the intraparietal sulcus.

Lussier CA(1), Cantlon JF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester, USA.

Children and adults show behavioral evidence of psychological overlap between 
their early, non-symbolic numerical concepts and their later-developing symbolic 
numerical concepts. An open question is to what extent the common cognitive 
signatures observed between different numerical notations are coupled with 
physical overlap in neural processes. We show that from 8 years of age, regions 
of the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) that exhibit a numerical ratio effect during 
non-symbolic numerical judgments also show a semantic distance effect for 
symbolic number words. In both children and adults, the IPS showed a semantic 
distance effect during magnitude judgments of number words (i.e. larger/smaller 
number) but not for magnitude judgments of object words (i.e. larger/smaller 
object size). The results provide novel evidence of conceptual overlap between 
neural representations of symbolic and non-symbolic numerical values that cannot 
be explained by a general process, and present the first demonstration of an 
early-developing dissociation between number words and object words in the human 
brain.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12385
PMID: 26825322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1125. Dev Sci. 2017 May;20(3). doi: 10.1111/desc.12384. Epub 2016 Jan 29.

Reduced adaptability, but no fundamental disruption, of norm-based face coding 
following early visual deprivation from congenital cataracts.

Rhodes G(1), Nishimura M(2), de Heering A(2), Jeffery L(1), Maurer D(2).

Author information:
(1)ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders, School of 
Psychology, University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia, 
Australia.
(2)Department of Psychology, Neuroscience and Behaviour, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Faces are adaptively coded relative to visual norms that are updated by 
experience, and this adaptive coding is linked to face recognition ability. Here 
we investigated whether adaptive coding of faces is disrupted in individuals 
(adolescents and adults) who experience face recognition difficulties following 
visual deprivation from congenital cataracts in infancy. We measured adaptive 
coding using face identity aftereffects, where smaller aftereffects indicate 
less adaptive updating of face-coding mechanisms by experience. We also examined 
whether the aftereffects increase with adaptor identity strength, consistent 
with norm-based coding of identity, as in typical populations, or whether they 
show a different pattern indicating some more fundamental disruption of 
face-coding mechanisms. Cataract-reversal patients showed significantly smaller 
face identity aftereffects than did controls (Experiments 1 and 2). However, 
their aftereffects increased significantly with adaptor strength, consistent 
with norm-based coding (Experiment 2). Thus we found reduced adaptability but no 
fundamental disruption of norm-based face-coding mechanisms in cataract-reversal 
patients. Our results suggest that early visual experience is important for the 
normal development of adaptive face-coding mechanisms.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12384
PMID: 26825050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1126. Dev Sci. 2016 Jan;19(1):3-18. doi: 10.1111/desc.12373. Epub 2015 Nov 8.

The neurodynamics of emotion: delineating typical and atypical emotional 
processes during adolescence.

Heller AS(1)(2), Casey BJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Medical College of 
Cornell University, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Miami, USA.

The study of development is, in and of itself, the study of change over time, 
but emotions, particularly emotional reactivity and emotional regulation, also 
unfold over time, albeit over briefer time-scales. Adolescence is a period of 
development characterized by marked changes in emotional processes and rewiring 
of the underlying neural circuitry, making this time of life formative. Yet this 
period is also a time of increased risk for anxiety and mood disorders. Changes 
in the temporal dynamics of emotional processes (e.g. magnitude, time-to-peak 
and duration) occur during this developmental period and have been associated 
with risk for mood and anxiety disorders. In this article, we describe how the 
temporal dynamics of emotions change during adolescence and how they may 
increase risk for these psychopathologies. We highlight studies that illustrate 
how formalizing temporal neurodynamics of emotion may enhance links among levels 
of analyses from neurobiological to real-world, moment-to-moment experiences.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12373
PMID: 26548573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1127. Dev Sci. 2017 Mar;20(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12350. Epub 2015 Nov 6.

When does social learning become cultural learning?

Heyes C(1).

Author information:
(1)All Souls College & Department of Experimental Psychology, University of 
Oxford, UK.

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2017 Mar;20(2):null.
    Dev Sci. 2017 Mar;20(2):

Developmental research on selective social learning, or 'social learning 
strategies', is currently a rich source of information about when children copy 
behaviour, and who they prefer to copy. It also has the potential to tell us 
when and how human social learning becomes cultural learning; i.e. mediated by 
psychological mechanisms that are specialized, genetically or culturally, to 
promote cultural inheritance. However, this review article argues that, to 
realize its potential, research on the development of selective social learning 
needs more clearly to distinguish functional from mechanistic explanation; to 
achieve integration with research on attention and learning in adult humans and 
'dumb' animals; and to recognize that psychological mechanisms can be 
specialized, not only by genetic evolution, but also by associative learning and 
cultural evolution.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12350
PMID: 26547886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1128. Dev Sci. 2016 Sep;19(5):770-80. doi: 10.1111/desc.12358. Epub 2015 Nov 5.

Categorization in infancy: labeling induces a persisting focus on commonalities.

Althaus N(1), Plunkett K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, UK.

Recent studies with infants and adults demonstrate a facilitative role of labels 
in object categorization. A common interpretation is that labels highlight 
commonalities between objects. However, direct evidence for such a mechanism is 
lacking. Using a novel object category with spatially separate features that are 
either of low or high variability across the stimulus set, we tracked 
12-month-olds' attention to object features during learning and at test. 
Learning occurred in both conditions, but what was learned depended on whether 
or not labels were heard. A detailed analysis of eye movements revealed that 
infants in the two conditions employed different object processing strategies. 
In the silent condition, looking patterns were governed exclusively by the 
variability of object parts. In the label condition, infants' categorization 
performance was linked to their relative attention to commonalities. Moreover, 
the commonality focus persisted after learning even in the absence of labels. 
These findings constitute the first experimental evidence that labels induce a 
persistent focus on commonalities.

© 2015 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12358
PMCID: PMC4995729
PMID: 26538010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1129. Dev Sci. 2016 Sep;19(5):741-56. doi: 10.1111/desc.12330. Epub 2015 Aug 18.

Brain and behavioral inhibitory control of kindergartners facing negative 
emotions.

Farbiash T(1), Berger A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel.

Inhibitory control (IC) - one of the most critical functions underlying a 
child's ability to self-regulate - develops significantly throughout the 
kindergarten years. Experiencing negative emotions imposes challenges on 
executive functioning and may specifically affect IC. In this study, we examined 
kindergartners' IC and its related brain activity during a negative emotional 
situation: 58 children (aged 5.5-6.5 years) performed an emotion-induction 
Go/NoGo task. During this task, we recorded children's performance and brain 
activity, focusing on the fronto-central N2 component in the event-related 
potential (ERP) and the power of its underlying theta frequency. Compared to Go 
trials, inhibition of NoGo trials was associated with larger N2 amplitudes and 
theta power. The negative emotional experience resulted in better IC performance 
and, at the brain level, in larger theta power. Source localization of this 
effect showed that the brain activity related to IC during the negative 
emotional experience was principally generated in the posterior frontal regions. 
Furthermore, the band power measure was found to be a more sensitive index for 
children's inhibitory processes than N2 amplitudes. This is the first study to 
focus on kindergartners' IC while manipulating their emotional experience to 
induce negative emotions. Our findings suggest that a kindergartner's experience 
of negative emotion can result in improved IC and increases in associated 
aspects of brain activity. Our results also suggest the utility of 
time-frequency analyses in the study of brain processes associated with response 
inhibition in young children.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12330
PMID: 26287125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1130. Dev Sci. 2016 Sep;19(5):710-22. doi: 10.1111/desc.12325. Epub 2015 Aug 9.

Electrophysiological evidence of phonetic normalization across coarticulation in 
infants.

Mersad K(1)(2)(3), Dehaene-Lambertz G(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)INSERM, U992, Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit, Paris, France.
(2)CEA, DSV/I2BM, NeuroSpin Center, Paris, France.
(3)University Paris-Sud, Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit, France.

The auditory neural representations of infants can easily be studied with 
electroencephalography using mismatch experimental designs. We recorded 
high-density event-related potentials while 3-month-old infants were listening 
to trials consisting of CV syllables produced with different vowels (/bX/ or 
/gX/). The consonant remained the same for the first three syllables, followed 
(or not) by a change in the fourth position. A consonant change evoked a 
significant difference around the second auditory peak (400-600 ms) relative to 
control trials. This mismatch response demonstrates that the infants robustly 
categorized the consonant despite coarticulation that blurs the phonetic cues, 
and at an age at which they do not produce these consonants themselves. This 
response was obtained even when infants had no visual articulatory information 
to help them to track the consonant repetition. In combination with previous 
studies establishing categorical perception and normalization across speakers, 
this result demonstrates that preverbal infants already have abstract phonetic 
representation integrating over acoustical features in the first months of life.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12325
PMID: 26259149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1131. Dev Sci. 2016 Sep;19(5):803-16. doi: 10.1111/desc.12327. Epub 2015 Jul 17.

Integration of audio-visual information for spatial decisions in children and 
adults.

Nardini M(1)(2), Bales J(2), Mareschal D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Durham, UK.
(2)Department of Visual Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, UK.
(3)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Department of Psychological 
Sciences, Birkbeck University of London, UK.

In adults, decisions based on multisensory information can be faster and/or more 
accurate than those relying on a single sense. However, this finding varies 
significantly across development. Here we studied speeded responding to 
audio-visual targets, a key multisensory function whose development remains 
unclear. We found that when judging the locations of targets, children aged 4 to 
12 years and adults had faster and less variable response times given auditory 
and visual information together compared with either alone. Comparison of 
response time distributions with model predictions indicated that children at 
all ages were integrating (pooling) sensory information to make decisions but 
that both the overall speed and the efficiency of sensory integration improved 
with age. The evidence for pooling comes from comparison with the predictions of 
Miller's seminal 'race model', as well as with a major recent extension of this 
model and a comparable 'pooling' (coactivation) model. The findings and analyses 
can reconcile results from previous audio-visual studies, in which infants 
showed speed gains exceeding race model predictions in a spatial orienting task 
(Neil et al., 2006) but children below 7 years did not in speeded reaction time 
tasks (e.g. Barutchu et al., 2009). Our results provide new evidence for early 
and sustained abilities to integrate visual and auditory signals for spatial 
localization from a young age.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12327
PMID: 26190579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1132. Dev Sci. 2016 May;19(3):488-503. doi: 10.1111/desc.12323. Epub 2015 Jul 17.

On the edge of language acquisition: inherent constraints on encoding 
multisyllabic sequences in the neonate brain.

Ferry AL(1), Fló A(1), Brusini P(1), Cattarossi L(2), Macagno F(2), Nespor M(1), 
Mehler J(1).

Author information:
(1)Language, Cognition, and Development Laboratory, Scuola Internazional 
Superiore di Studi Avanzati, Trieste, Italy.
(2)Neonatology Unit, Azienda Ospedaliera Santa Maria della Misericordia, Udine, 
Italy.

To understand language, humans must encode information from rapid, sequential 
streams of syllables - tracking their order and organizing them into words, 
phrases, and sentences. We used Near-Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS) to determine 
whether human neonates are born with the capacity to track the positions of 
syllables in multisyllabic sequences. After familiarization with a six-syllable 
sequence, the neonate brain responded to the change (as shown by an increase in 
oxy-hemoglobin) when the two edge syllables switched positions but not when two 
middle syllables switched positions (Experiment 1), indicating that they encoded 
the syllables at the edges of sequences better than those in the middle. 
Moreover, when a 25 ms pause was inserted between the middle syllables as a 
segmentation cue, neonates' brains were sensitive to the change (Experiment 2), 
indicating that subtle cues in speech can signal a boundary, with enhanced 
encoding of the syllables located at the edges of that boundary. These findings 
suggest that neonates' brains can encode information from multisyllabic 
sequences and that this encoding is constrained. Moreover, subtle segmentation 
cues in a sequence of syllables provide a mechanism with which to accurately 
encode positional information from longer sequences. Tracking the order of 
syllables is necessary to understand language and our results suggest that the 
foundations for this encoding are present at birth.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12323
PMID: 26190466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1133. Dev Sci. 2016 May;19(3):452-68. doi: 10.1111/desc.12312. Epub 2015 May 25.

Rethinking the concepts of 'local or global processors': evidence from Williams 
syndrome, Down syndrome, and Autism Spectrum Disorders.

D'Souza D(1), Booth R(2), Connolly M(1), Happé F(3), Karmiloff-Smith A(1).

Author information:
(1)Birkbeck Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, University of London, 
UK.
(2)Institute of Child Health, University College London, UK.
(3)Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Research Centre, Institute of 
Psychiatry, King's College London, UK.

Both Williams syndrome (WS) and Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) have been 
characterized as preferentially processing local information, whereas in Down 
syndrome (DS) the reported tendency is to process stimuli globally. We designed 
a cross-syndrome, cross-task comparison to reveal similarities and differences 
in local/global processing in these disorders. Our in-depth study compared 
local/global processing across modalities (auditory-verbal/visuo-spatial) and 
levels of processing (high/low) in the three syndromes. Despite claims in the 
literature, participants with ASD or WS failed to show a consistent local 
processing bias, while those with DS failed to show a reliable global processing 
bias. Depending on the nature of the stimuli and the task, both local and global 
processing biases were evident in all three neurodevelopmental disorders. These 
findings indicate that individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders cannot 
simply be characterized as local or global processors.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12312
PMCID: PMC4789488
PMID: 26010432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1134. Dev Sci. 2016 Mar;19(2):221-34. doi: 10.1111/desc.12307. Epub 2015 Apr 14.

Hot executive function following moderate-to-late preterm birth: altered delay 
discounting at 4 years of age.

Hodel AS(1), Brumbaugh JE(2), Morris AR(1), Thomas KM(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Child Development, University of Minnesota, USA.
(2)Stead Family Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa Hospitals and 
Clinics, USA.

Interest in monitoring long-term neurodevelopmental outcomes of children born 
moderate-to-late preterm (32-36 weeks gestation) is increasing. Moderate-to-late 
preterm birth has a negative impact on academic achievement, which may relate to 
differential development of executive function (EF). Prior studies reporting 
deficits in EF in preterm children have almost exclusively assessed EF in 
affectively neutral contexts in high-risk preterm children (< 32 weeks 
gestation). Disrupted function in motivational or emotionally charged contexts 
(hot EF) following preterm birth remains uninvestigated, despite evidence that 
preterm children show differential development of neural circuitry subserving 
hot EF, including reduced orbitofrontal cortex volume. The present study is the 
first to examine whether low-risk, healthy children born moderate-to-late 
preterm exhibit impairments in the development of hot EF. Preterm children at 
age 4.5 years were less likely to choose larger, delayed rewards across all 
levels of reward magnitude on a delay discounting task using tangible rewards, 
but performed more similarly to their full-term peers on a delay aversion task 
involving abstract rewards and on measures of cool EF. The relationship between 
gestational age at birth and selection of delayed rewards extended across the 
entire gestational age range of the sample (32-42 weeks), and remained 
significant after controlling for intelligence and processing speed. Results 
imply that there is not a finite cut-off point at which children are spared from 
potential long-term neurodevelopmental effects of PT birth. Further 
investigation of reward processing and hot EF in individuals with a history of 
PT birth is warranted given the susceptibility of prefrontal cortex development 
to early environmental variations.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12307
PMID: 25873181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1135. Dev Sci. 2016 Mar;19(2):306-17. doi: 10.1111/desc.12305. Epub 2015 Apr 14.

Animal, but not human, faces engage the distributed face network in adolescents 
with autism.

Whyte EM(1), Behrmann M(2), Minshew NJ(3), Garcia NV(1), Scherf KS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Penn State University, USA.
(2)Departments of Psychiatry and Neurology, University of Pittsburgh Medical 
School, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, USA.

Multiple hypotheses have been offered to explain the impaired face-processing 
behavior and the accompanying underlying disruptions in neural circuitry among 
individuals with autism. We explored the specificity of atypical face-processing 
activation and potential alterations to fusiform gyrus (FG) morphology as 
potential underlying mechanisms. Adolescents with high functioning autism (HFA) 
and age-matched typically developing (TD) adolescents were scanned with sMRI and 
fMRI as they observed human and animal faces. In spite of exhibiting comparable 
face recognition behavior, the HFA adolescents evinced hypo-activation 
throughout the face-processing system in response to unfamiliar human, but not 
animal, faces. They also exhibited greater activation in affective regions of 
the face-processing network in response to animal, but not human, faces. 
Importantly, this atypical pattern of activation in response to human faces was 
not related to atypical structural properties of the FG. This atypical neural 
response to human faces in autism may stem from abnormalities in the ability to 
represent the reward value of social (i.e. conspecific) stimuli.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12305
PMID: 25873084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1136. Dev Sci. 2016 Jan;19(1):19-31. doi: 10.1111/desc.12297. Epub 2015 Mar 17.

Electrophysiological measures of resting state functional connectivity and their 
relationship with working memory capacity in childhood.

Barnes JJ(1), Woolrich MW(2), Baker K(3), Colclough GL(2), Astle DE(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council, Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK.
(2)Oxford Centre for Human Brain Activity, University of Oxford, UK.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge, UK.

Functional connectivity is the statistical association of neuronal activity time 
courses across distinct brain regions, supporting specific cognitive processes. 
This coordination of activity is likely to be highly important for complex 
aspects of cognition, such as the communication of fluctuating task goals from 
higher-order control regions to lower-order, functionally specific regions. Some 
of these functional connections are identifiable even when relevant cognitive 
tasks are not being performed (i.e. at rest). We used magnetoencephalographic 
recordings projected into source space to demonstrate that resting state 
networks in childhood have electrophysiological underpinnings that are evident 
in the spontaneous fluctuations of oscillatory brain activity. Using the 
temporal structure of these oscillatory patterns we were able to identify a 
number of functional resting state networks analogous to those reported in the 
adult literature. In a second analysis we fused this dynamic temporal 
information with the spatial information from a functional magnetic resonance 
imaging analysis of functional connectivity, to demonstrate that inter-subject 
variability in these electrophysiological measures of functional connectivity is 
correlated with individual differences in cognitive ability: the strength of 
connectivity between a fronto-parietal network and lower-level processing areas 
in inferior temporal cortex was associated with spatial working memory capacity, 
as measured outside the scanner with educationally relevant standardized 
assessments. This study represents the first exploration of the 
electrophysiological mechanisms underpinning resting state functional 
connectivity in source space in childhood, and the extent to which the strength 
of particular connections is associated with cognitive ability.

© 2015 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12297
PMCID: PMC4832342
PMID: 25782537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1137. Dev Sci. 2016 Jan;19(1):155-63. doi: 10.1111/desc.12292. Epub 2015 Mar 17.

Affective matching of odors and facial expressions in infants: shifting patterns 
between 3 and 7 months.

Godard O(1)(2), Baudouin JY(1)(3), Schaal B(1), Durand K(1).

Author information:
(1)Developmental Ethology and Cognitive Psychology Group, Centre for Smell, 
Taste and Food Science (UMR 6265 CNRS - UMR 1324 INRA), Université de Bourgogne, 
Dijon, France.
(2)Laboratoire Vision, Action, Cognition (EA 7326), Université Paris Descartes, 
France.
(3)Institut Universitaire de France, France.

Recognition of emotional facial expressions is a crucial skill for adaptive 
behavior. Past research suggests that at 5 to 7 months of age, infants look 
longer to an unfamiliar dynamic angry/happy face which emotionally matches a 
vocal expression. This suggests that they can match stimulations of distinct 
modalities on their emotional content. In the present study, olfaction-vision 
matching abilities were assessed across different age groups (3, 5 and 7 months) 
using dynamic expressive faces (happy vs. disgusted) and distinct hedonic odor 
contexts (pleasant, unpleasant and control) in a visual-preference paradigm. At 
all ages the infants were biased toward the disgust faces. This visual bias 
reversed into a bias for smiling faces in the context of the pleasant odor 
context in the 3-month-old infants. In infants aged 5 and 7 months, no effect of 
the odor context appeared in the present conditions. This study highlights the 
role of the olfactory context in the modulation of visual behavior toward 
expressive faces in infants. The influence of olfaction took the form of a 
contingency effect in 3-month-old infants, but later evolved to vanish or to 
take another form that could not be evidenced in the present study.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12292
PMID: 25782470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1138. Dev Sci. 2016 Mar;19(2):318-28. doi: 10.1111/desc.12298. Epub 2015 Mar 5.

When infants talk, infants listen: pre-babbling infants prefer listening to 
speech with infant vocal properties.

Masapollo M(1)(2), Polka L(1)(2), Ménard L(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Communication Sciences & Disorders, McGill University, Canada.
(2)Centre for Research on Brain, Language & Music, McGill University, Canada.
(3)Département de Linguistique, Université du Québec à Montréal, Canada.

To learn to produce speech, infants must effectively monitor and assess their 
own speech output. Yet very little is known about how infants perceive speech 
produced by an infant, which has higher voice pitch and formant frequencies 
compared to adult or child speech. Here, we tested whether pre-babbling infants 
(at 4-6 months) prefer listening to vowel sounds with infant vocal properties 
over vowel sounds with adult vocal properties. A listening preference favoring 
infant vowels may derive from their higher voice pitch, which has been shown to 
attract infant attention in infant-directed speech (IDS). In addition, infants' 
nascent articulatory abilities may induce a bias favoring infant speech given 
that 4- to 6-month-olds are beginning to produce vowel sounds. We created infant 
and adult /i/ ('ee') vowels using a production-based synthesizer that simulates 
the act of speaking in talkers at different ages and then tested infants across 
four experiments using a sequential preferential listening task. The findings 
provide the first evidence that infants preferentially attend to vowel sounds 
with infant voice pitch and/or formants over vowel sounds with no infant-like 
vocal properties, supporting the view that infants' production abilities 
influence how they process infant speech. The findings with respect to voice 
pitch also reveal parallels between IDS and infant speech, raising new questions 
about the role of this speech register in infant development. Research exploring 
the underpinnings and impact of this perceptual bias can expand our 
understanding of infant language development.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12298
PMID: 25754812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1139. Dev Sci. 2016 Jan;19(1):76-89. doi: 10.1111/desc.12290. Epub 2015 Mar 5.

Cross-linguistic interactions influence reading development in bilinguals: a 
comparison between early balanced French-Basque and Spanish-Basque bilingual 
children.

Lallier M(1), Acha J(2), Carreiras M(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language, San Sebastían, Spain.
(2)Departamento Psicología básica, UPV/EHU, San Sebastían, Spain.
(3)Basque Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain.
(4)Departamento Lengua Vasca y Comunicación, UPV/EHU, Bilbao, Spain.

This study investigates whether orthographic consistency and transparency of 
languages have an impact on the development of reading strategies and reading 
sub-skills (i.e. phonemic awareness and visual attention span) in bilingual 
children. We evaluated 21 French (opaque)-Basque (transparent) bilingual 
children and 21 Spanish (transparent)-Basque (transparent) bilingual children at 
Grade 2, and 16 additional children of each group at Grade 5. All of them were 
assessed in their common language (i.e. Basque) on tasks measuring word and 
pseudoword reading, phonemic awareness and visual attention span skills. The 
Spanish speaking groups showed better Basque pseudoword reading and better 
phonemic awareness abilities than their French speaking peers, but only in the 
most difficult conditions of the tasks. However, on the visual attention span 
task, the French-Basque bilinguals showed the most efficient visual processing 
strategies to perform the task. Therefore, learning to read in an additional 
language affected differently Basque literacy skills, depending on whether this 
additional orthography was opaque (e.g. French) or transparent (e.g. Spanish). 
Moreover, we showed that the most noteworthy effects of Spanish and French 
orthographic transparency on Basque performance were related to the size of the 
phonological and visual grain used to perform the tasks.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12290
PMID: 25754374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1140. Dev Sci. 2016 Jan;19(1):145-54. doi: 10.1111/desc.12288. Epub 2015 Feb 20.

The attentional 'zoom-lens' in 8-month-old infants.

Ronconi L(1)(2), Franchin L(3), Valenza E(3), Gori S(1)(2), Facoetti A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Developmental and Cognitive Neuroscience Lab, Department of General 
Psychology, University of Padua, Italy.
(2)Child Psychopathology Unit, Scientific Institute IRCSS 'E. Medea', Bosisio 
Parini, Lecco, Italy.
(3)Infant Cognitive Lab, Department of Developmental and Socialization 
Psychology, University of Padua, Italy.

The spatial attention mechanisms of orienting and zooming cooperate to properly 
select visual information from the environment and plan eye movements 
accordingly. Despite the fact that orienting ability has been extensively 
studied in infancy, the zooming mechanism--namely, the ability to distribute the 
attentional resources to a small or large portion of the visual field--has never 
been tested before. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the attentional 
zooming abilities of 8-month-old infants. An eye-tracker device was employed to 
measure the saccadic latencies (SLs) at the onset of a visual target displayed 
at two eccentricities. The size of the more eccentric target was adjusted in 
order to counteract the effect of cortical magnification. Before the target 
display, attentional resources were automatically focused (zoom-in) or spread 
out (zoom-out) by using a small or large cue, respectively. Two different 
cue-target intervals were also employed to measure the time course of this 
attentional mechanism. The results showed that infants' SLs varied as a function 
of the cue size. Moreover, a clear time course emerged, demonstrating that 
infants can rapidly adjust the attentional focus size during a pre-saccadic 
temporal window. These findings could serve as an early marker for 
neurodevelopmental disorders associated with attentional zooming dysfunction 
such as autism and dyslexia.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12288
PMID: 25702701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1141. Dev Sci. 2016 Jan;19(1):164-74. doi: 10.1111/desc.12287. Epub 2015 Feb 20.

Neighborhood crime as a predictor of individual differences in emotional 
processing and regulation.

McCoy DC(1), Roy AL(2), Raver CC(3).

Author information:
(1)Center on the Developing Child, Harvard University, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at Chicago, USA.
(3)Department of Applied Psychology, New York University, USA.

Emerging research suggests that early exposure to environmental adversity has 
important implications for the development of brain regions associated with 
emotion regulation, yet little is known about how such adversity translates into 
observable differences in children's emotion-related behavior. The present study 
examines the relationship between geocoded neighborhood crime and urban 
pre-adolescents' emotional attention, appraisal, and response. Results indicate 
that living in a high-crime neighborhood is associated with greater selective 
attention toward negatively valenced emotional stimuli on a dot probe task, less 
biased appraisal of fear on a facial identification task, and lower rates of 
teacher-reported internalizing behaviors in the classroom. These findings 
suggest that children facing particularly high levels of environmental threat 
may develop different regulatory processes (e.g. greater use of emotional 
suppression) than their peers from low-crime neighborhoods in order to manage 
the unique stressors and social demands of their communities.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12287
PMCID: PMC5111804
PMID: 25702532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1142. Dev Sci. 2015 Sep;18(5):799-814. doi: 10.1111/desc.12268. Epub 2015 Feb 9.

Parental socioeconomic status and the neural basis of arithmetic: differential 
relations to verbal and visuo-spatial representations.

Demir ÖE(1)(2), Prado J(3), Booth JR(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northwestern University, 
USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, USA.
(3)Laboratoire Langage, Cerveau et Cognition, Centre National de la Recherche 
Scienctifique (CNRS) and Université de Lyon, France.
(4)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, University of 
Texas-Austin, USA.

We examined the relation of parental socioeconomic status (SES) to the neural 
bases of subtraction in school-age children (9- to 12-year-olds). We 
independently localized brain regions subserving verbal versus visuo-spatial 
representations to determine whether the parental SES-related differences in 
children's reliance on these neural representations vary as a function of math 
skill. At higher SES levels, higher skill was associated with greater 
recruitment of the left temporal cortex, identified by the verbal localizer. At 
lower SES levels, higher skill was associated with greater recruitment of right 
parietal cortex, identified by the visuo-spatial localizer. This suggests that 
depending on parental SES, children engage different neural systems to solve 
subtraction problems. Furthermore, SES was related to the activation in the left 
temporal and frontal cortex during the independent verbal localizer task, but it 
was not related to activation during the independent visuo-spatial localizer 
task. Differences in activation during the verbal localizer task in turn were 
related to differences in activation during the subtraction task in right 
parietal cortex. The relation was stronger at lower SES levels. This result 
suggests that SES-related differences in the visuo-spatial regions during 
subtraction might be based in SES-related verbal differences.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12268
PMCID: PMC4522207
PMID: 25664675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1143. Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):1003-11. doi: 10.1111/desc.12193.

Interpersonal synchrony increases prosocial behavior in infants.

Cirelli LK, Einarson KM, Trainor LJ.

Adults who move together to a shared musical beat synchronously as opposed to 
asynchronously are subsequently more likely to display prosocial behaviors 
toward each other. The development of musical behaviors during infancy has been 
described previously, but the social implications of such behaviors in infancy 
have been little studied. In Experiment 1, each of 48 14-month-old infants was 
held by an assistant and gently bounced to music while facing the experimenter, 
who bounced either in-synchrony or out-of-synchrony with the way the infant was 
bounced. The infants were then placed in a situation in which they had the 
opportunity to help the experimenter by handing objects to her that she had 
‘accidently’ dropped. We found that 14-month-old infants were more likely to 
engage in altruistic behavior and help the experimenter after having been 
bounced to music in synchrony with her, compared to infants who were bounced to 
music asynchronously with her. The results of Experiment 2, using anti-phase 
bouncing, suggest that this is due to the contingency of the synchronous 
movements as opposed to movement symmetry. These findings support the hypothesis 
that interpersonal motor synchrony might be one key component of musical 
engagement that encourages social bonds among group members, and suggest that 
this motor synchrony to music may promote the very early development of 
altruistic behavior.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12193
PMID: 25513669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1144. Dev Sci. 2015 Nov;18(6):1006-13. doi: 10.1111/desc.12270. Epub 2014 Dec 7.

Infant's action skill dynamically modulates parental action demonstration in the 
dyadic interaction.

Fukuyama H(1), Qin S(2), Kanakogi Y(1), Nagai Y(2), Asada M(2), Myowa-Yamakoshi 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Education, Kyoto University, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University, Japan.

When interacting with infants, human adults modify their behaviours in an 
exaggerated manner. Previous studies have demonstrated that infant-directed 
modification affects the infant's behaviour. However, little is known about how 
infant-directed modification is elicited during infant-parent interaction. We 
investigated whether and how the infant's behaviour affects the mother's action 
during an interaction. We recorded three-dimensional information of cup 
movements while mothers demonstrated a cup-nesting task during interaction with 
their infants aged 11 to 13 months. Analyses revealed that spatial 
characteristics of the mother's task demonstration clearly changed depending on 
the infant's object manipulation. In particular, the variance in the distance 
that the cup was moved decreased after the infant's cup nesting and increased 
after the infant's task-irrelevant manipulation (e.g. cup banging). This pattern 
was not observed for mothers with 6- to 8-month-olds, who do not have the fine 
motor skill to perform the action. These results indicate that the infant's 
action skill dynamically affects the infant-directed action and suggest that the 
mother is sensitive to the infant's potential to learn a novel action. A video 
abstract of this article can be viewed at: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VNS2IHwLIhg&feature=youtu.be.

© 2014 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12270
PMID: 25483121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1145. Dev Sci. 2015 Sep;18(5):824-31. doi: 10.1111/desc.12265. Epub 2014 Dec 7.

Understanding the effects of one's actions upon hidden objects and the 
development of search behaviour in 7-month-old infants.

O'Connor RJ(1), Russell J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, UK.

Infants' understanding of how their actions affect the visibility of hidden 
objects may be a crucial aspect of the development of search behaviour. To 
investigate this possibility, 7-month-old infants took part in a two-day 
training study. At the start of the first session, and at the end of the second, 
all infants performed a search task with a hiding-well. On both days, infants 
had an additional training experience. The 'Agency group' learnt to spin a 
turntable to reveal a hidden toy, whilst the 'Means-End' group learnt the same 
means-end motor action, but the toy was always visible. The Agency group showed 
greater improvement on the hiding-well search task following their training 
experience. We suggest that the Agency group's turntable experience was 
effective because it provided the experience of bringing objects back into 
visibility by one's actions. Further, the performance of the Agency group 
demonstrates generalized transfer of learning across situations with both 
different motor actions and stimuli in infants as young as 7 months.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12265
PMID: 25482881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1146. Dev Sci. 2015 Sep;18(5):723-35. doi: 10.1111/desc.12250. Epub 2014 Nov 28.

Looking and touching: what extant approaches reveal about the structure of early 
word knowledge.

Hendrickson K(1)(2), Mitsven S(2), Poulin-Dubois D(3), Zesiger P(4), Friend 
M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, San Diego State University, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Concordia University, Canada.
(4)Department of Psychology, Université de Genève, Switzerland.

The goal of the current study is to assess the temporal dynamics of vision and 
action to evaluate the underlying word representations that guide infants' 
responses. Sixteen-month-old infants participated in a two-alternative 
forced-choice word-picture matching task. We conducted a moment-by-moment 
analysis of looking and reaching behaviors as they occurred in tandem to assess 
the speed with which a prompted word was processed (visual reaction time) as a 
function of the type of haptic response: Target, Distractor, or No Touch. Visual 
reaction times (visual RTs) were significantly slower during No Touches compared 
to Distractor and Target Touches, which were statistically indistinguishable. 
The finding that visual RTs were significantly faster during Distractor Touches 
compared to No Touches suggests that incorrect and absent haptic responses 
appear to index distinct knowledge states: incorrect responses are associated 
with partial knowledge whereas absent responses appear to reflect a true failure 
to map lexical items to their target referents. Further, we found that those 
children who were faster at processing words were also those children who 
exhibited better haptic performance. This research provides a methodological 
clarification on knowledge measured by the visual and haptic modalities and new 
evidence for a continuum of word knowledge in the second year of life.

© 2014 The Authors Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12250
PMCID: PMC4447618
PMID: 25444711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1147. Dev Sci. 2015 Jul;18(4):664-70. doi: 10.1111/desc.12244. Epub 2014 Nov 28.

Mechanisms underlying accent accommodation in early word learning: evidence for 
general expansion.

Schmale R(1), Seidl A(2), Cristia A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, North Park University, USA.
(2)Department of Speech, Language and Hearing Sciences, Purdue University, USA.
(3)Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et Psycholinguistique, EHESS, DEC-ENS, 
CNRS, France.

Previous work reveals that toddlers can accommodate a novel accent after hearing 
it for only a brief period of time. A common assumption is that children, like 
adults, cope with nonstandard pronunciations by relying on words they know (e.g. 
'this person pronounces sock as sack, therefore by black she meant block'). In 
this paper, we assess whether toddlers might additionally use a general 
expansion strategy, whereby they simply accept non-standard pronunciations when 
variability is expected. We exposed a group of 24-month-old English-learning 
toddlers to variability in indexical cues (very diverse voices from native 
English talkers), and another to variability in social cues (very 
diverse-looking silent actors); neither group was familiarized with the target 
novel accent. At test, both groups succeeded in recognizing a novel word when 
spoken in the novel accent. Thus, even when no lexical cues are available, 
variability can prepare young children for non-standard pronunciations.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12244
PMID: 25443808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1148. Dev Sci. 2015 Sep;18(5):671-85. doi: 10.1111/desc.12243. Epub 2014 Nov 28.

Towards a better understanding of the relationship between executive control and 
theory of mind: an intra-cultural comparison of three diverse samples.

Shahaeian A(1), Henry JD(1), Razmjoee M(2), Teymoori A(1), Wang C(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Queensland, Australia.
(2)School of Education, Shiraz University, Iran.
(3)Research Institute for Professional Practice, Learning, and Education, 
Charles Sturt University, Australia.

Previous research has consistently indicated that theory of mind (ToM) is 
associated with executive control in the preschool years. However, 
interpretation of this literature is limited by the fact that most studies have 
focused exclusively on urbanized Western cultural samples. Consequently, it is 
not clear whether the association between ToM and executive control reflects the 
specific features of this particular cohort or instead reflects a universal 
pattern. The present study provides the first empirical assessment of these two 
constructs in three diverse groups of Iranian children. Participants were 142 
preschoolers (4-5 years old) from high-socioeconomic status (SES) urban (n = 
33), low-SES urban (n = 37) and rural villages (n = 77). The results show that 
there is a robust association between ToM and executive control in all three 
groups, and that executive control contributes significant unique variance to 
ToM understanding, even after controlling for a range of variables that have 
been proposed as potential confounders of this relationship. However, although 
the three groups were equated in ToM, significant differences in executive 
control were evident. Moreover, cluster analysis identified three distinct 
clusters that were relatively homogeneous with respect to executive control and 
SES. One of these clusters was characterized by both low SES and low executive 
functioning, and showed little evidence of ToM understanding. Taken together, 
these findings provide possibly the clearest evidence to date that the 
association between ToM and executive control is not dependent on children's 
previous experiences on the tasks, or their family and cultural background.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12243
PMID: 25443564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1149. Dev Sci. 2015 Nov;18(6):909-16. doi: 10.1111/desc.12267. Epub 2014 Nov 29.

Infants' use of social partnerships to predict behavior.

Rhodes M(1), Hetherington C(2), Brink K(3), Wellman HM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, New York University, USA.
(2)Institute of Child Development, University of Minnesota, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, USA.

The experiences of social partners are important motivators of social action. 
Can infants use such experiences to make predictions about how social agents 
will behave? Sixteen-month-old infants were introduced to two social pairs. 
Initial events established within-pair cooperation as well as between-pair 
conflict involving an individual from each pair. Following these events, infants 
looked longer when between-pair members who had never previously interacted now 
cooperated - instead of conflicted - with each other. Thus, infants tracked the 
third-person allegiances and inferred that the conflict would generalize across 
social partnerships. These findings demonstrate a critical feature of early 
social cognition and promote needed, further research on the role of social 
allegiances in social cognition across development.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12267
PMCID: PMC4465419
PMID: 25441335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1150. Dev Sci. 2015 Sep;18(5):751-70. doi: 10.1111/desc.12263. Epub 2014 Nov 29.

Processing of audiovisually congruent and incongruent speech in school-age 
children with a history of specific language impairment: a behavioral and 
event-related potentials study.

Kaganovich N(1)(2), Schumaker J(1), Macias D(1), Gustafson D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, Purdue University, USA.
(2)Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University, USA.

Previous studies indicate that at least some aspects of audiovisual speech 
perception are impaired in children with specific language impairment (SLI). 
However, whether audiovisual processing difficulties are also present in older 
children with a history of this disorder is unknown. By combining 
electrophysiological and behavioral measures, we examined perception of both 
audiovisually congruent and audiovisually incongruent speech in school-age 
children with a history of SLI (H-SLI), their typically developing (TD) peers, 
and adults. In the first experiment, all participants watched videos of a talker 
articulating syllables 'ba', 'da', and 'ga' under three conditions - audiovisual 
(AV), auditory only (A), and visual only (V). The amplitude of the N1 (but not 
of the P2) event-related component elicited in the AV condition was 
significantly reduced compared to the N1 amplitude measured from the sum of the 
A and V conditions in all groups of participants. Because N1 attenuation to AV 
speech is thought to index the degree to which facial movements predict the 
onset of the auditory signal, our findings suggest that this aspect of 
audiovisual speech perception is mature by mid-childhood and is normal in the 
H-SLI children. In the second experiment, participants watched videos of 
audivisually incongruent syllables created to elicit the so-called McGurk 
illusion (with an auditory 'pa' dubbed onto a visual articulation of 'ka', and 
the expectant perception being that of 'ta' if audiovisual integration took 
place). As a group, H-SLI children were significantly more likely than either TD 
children or adults to hear the McGurk syllable as 'pa' (in agreement with its 
auditory component) than as 'ka' (in agreement with its visual component), 
suggesting that susceptibility to the McGurk illusion is reduced in at least 
some children with a history of SLI. Taken together, the results of the two 
experiments argue against global audiovisual integration impairment in children 
with a history of SLI and suggest that, when present, audiovisual integration 
difficulties in this population likely stem from a later (non-sensory) stage of 
processing.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12263
PMCID: PMC4449323
PMID: 25440407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1151. Dev Sci. 2015 Sep;18(5):771-84. doi: 10.1111/desc.12260. Epub 2014 Nov 28.

Concurrent and lasting effects of emotion regulation on amygdala response in 
adolescence and young adulthood.

Silvers JA(1), Shu J(1), Hubbard AD(1), Weber J(1), Ochsner KN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Columbia University, USA.

This study used functional MRI (fMRI) to examine a novel aspect of emotion 
regulation in adolescent development: whether age predicts differences in both 
the concurrent and lasting effects of emotion regulation on amygdala response. 
In the first, active regulation, phase of the testing session, fMRI data were 
collected while 56 healthy individuals (age range: 10.50-22.92 years) 
reappraised aversive stimuli so as to diminish negative responses to them. After 
a short delay, the second, re-presentation, phase involved passively viewing the 
aversive images from the reappraisal task. During active regulation, older 
individuals showed greater drops in negative affect and inverse rostrolateral 
prefrontal-amygdala connectivity. During re-presentation, older individuals 
continued to show lasting reductions in the amygdala response to aversive 
stimuli they had previously reappraised, an effect mediated by rostrolateral 
PFC. These data suggest that one source of heightened emotionality in 
adolescence is a diminished ability to cognitively down-regulate aversive 
reactions.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12260
PMCID: PMC4459932
PMID: 25439326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1152. Dev Sci. 2015 Sep;18(5):842-52. doi: 10.1111/desc.12259. Epub 2014 Nov 29.

The lasting effects of process-specific versus stimulus-specific learning during 
infancy.

Hadley H(1), Pickron CB(1), Scott LS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Massachusetts 
Amherst, USA.

The capacity to tell the difference between two faces within an infrequently 
experienced face group (e.g. other species, other race) declines from 6 to 9 
months of age unless infants learn to match these faces with individual-level 
names. Similarly, the use of individual-level labels can also facilitate 
differentiation of a group of non-face objects (strollers). This early learning 
leads to increased neural specialization for previously unfamiliar face or 
object groups. The current investigation aimed to determine whether early 
conceptual learning between 6 and 9 months leads to sustained behavioral 
advantages and neural changes in these same children at 4-6 years of age. 
Results suggest that relative to a control group of children with no previous 
training and to children with infant category-level naming experience, children 
with early individual-level training exhibited faster response times to human 
faces. Further, individual-level training with a face group - but not an object 
group - led to more adult-like neural responses for human faces. These results 
suggest that early individual-level learning results in long-lasting 
process-specific effects, which benefit categories that continue to be perceived 
and recognized at the individual level (e.g. human faces).

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12259
PMID: 25439095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1153. Dev Sci. 2015 Jul;18(4):587-98. doi: 10.1111/desc.12242. Epub 2014 Oct 7.

Call me Alix, not Elix: vowels are more important than consonants in own-name 
recognition at 5 months.

Bouchon C(1)(2), Floccia C(3), Fux T(4), Adda-Decker M(4), Nazzi T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, France.
(2)CNRS - Laboratoire de Psychologie de la Perception (UMR 8242), Paris, France.
(3)School of Psychology, Plymouth University, UK.
(4)CNRS - Laboratoire de Phonétique et de Phonologie (UMR 7018), Paris, France.

Consonants and vowels differ acoustically and articulatorily, but also 
functionally: Consonants are more relevant for lexical processing, and vowels 
for prosodic/syntactic processing. These functional biases could be powerful 
bootstrapping mechanisms for learning language, but their developmental origin 
remains unclear. The relative importance of consonants and vowels at the onset 
of lexical acquisition was assessed in French-learning 5-month-olds by testing 
sensitivity to minimal phonetic changes in their own name. Infants' reactions to 
mispronunciations revealed sensitivity to vowel but not consonant changes. 
Vowels were also more salient (on duration and intensity) but less distinct (on 
spectrally based measures) than consonants. Lastly, vowel (but not consonant) 
mispronunciation detection was modulated by acoustic factors, in particular 
spectrally based distance. These results establish that consonant changes do not 
affect lexical recognition at 5 months, while vowel changes do; the consonant 
bias observed later in development does not emerge until after 5 months through 
additional language exposure.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12242
PMID: 25294431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1154. Dev Sci. 2015 Jul;18(4):511-24. doi: 10.1111/desc.12231. Epub 2014 Oct 5.

The development of adaptive conformity in young children: effects of uncertainty 
and consensus.

Morgan TJ(1)(2), Laland KN(1), Harris PL(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Social Learning and Cognitive Evolution, School of Biology, 
University of St Andrews, UK.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, USA.
(3)Harvard Graduate School of Education, Harvard University, USA.

Human culture relies on extensive use of social transmission, which must be 
integrated with independently acquired (i.e. asocial) information for effective 
decision-making. Formal evolutionary theory predicts that natural selection 
should favor adaptive learning strategies, including a bias to copy when 
uncertain, and a bias to disproportionately copy the majority (known as 
'conformist transmission'). Although the function and causation of these evolved 
strategies has been comparatively well studied, little is known of their 
development. We experimentally investigated the development of the bias to 
copy-when-uncertain and conformist transmission in children from the ages of 3 
to 7, testing predictions derived from theoretical models. Children first 
attempted to solve a binary-choice quantity discrimination task themselves using 
asocial information, but were then given the decisions of informants, and an 
opportunity to revise their answer. We investigated whether children's revised 
judgments were adaptively contingent on (i) the difficulty of the trial and (ii) 
the degree of consensus amongst informants. As predicted, older but not younger 
children copied others more on more difficult trials than on easier trials, even 
though older children also showed a tendency to stick with their initial, 
asocial decision. We also found that older children, like adults, were 
disproportionately receptive to non-total majorities (i.e. were conformist) 
whereas younger children were receptive only to total (i.e. unanimous) 
majorities. We conclude that, whilst the mechanism for incorporating social 
information into decision-making is initially very blunt, across the course of 
early childhood it converges on the adaptive learning mechanisms observed in 
adults and predicted by cultural evolutionary theory. A video abstract of this 
article can be viewed at http://youtu.be/Qb6JINGYqVk.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12231
PMID: 25283881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1155. Dev Sci. 2015 Jul;18(4):614-21. doi: 10.1111/desc.12237. Epub 2014 Sep 16.

Imitation promotes affiliation in infant macaques at risk for impaired social 
behaviors.

Sclafani V(1)(2), Paukner A(2), Suomi SJ(2), Ferrari PF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Università di Parma, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Comparative Ethology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute 
of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health Animal 
Center, USA.

Parental responsiveness and synchronization during early face-to-face 
interactions between mother and infant have been theorized to affect a broad 
spectrum of positive developmental outcomes in social and cognitive infant 
growth and to facilitate the development of a sense of self in the baby. Here we 
show that being imitated can significantly affect the behavior of nursery-reared 
infant monkeys, which are at an increased risk for developing aberrant social 
behaviors. Infants look longer and lipsmack more at an experimenter both during 
imitation and after being imitated. These results demonstrate that from early in 
life imitation might be used as a privileged form of communication by adults to 
enhance infants' visual engagement and their social communication. Imitation may 
therefore be useful to counteract the negative effects of early social 
adversities.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12237
PMCID: PMC4362791
PMID: 25227917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing financial interests The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.


1156. Dev Sci. 2015 Jul;18(4):543-55. doi: 10.1111/desc.12235. Epub 2014 Sep 11.

The intergenerational transmission of ethnic essentialism: how parents talk 
counts the most.

Segall G(1), Birnbaum D(1), Deeb I(1), Diesendruck G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Gonda Brain Research Center, Bar-Ilan 
University, Israel.

The present study analyzed the role of parents as potential sources of 
children's essentialist beliefs about ethnicity. We tested 76 parent-child 
(5-year-olds) dyads of Jewish Israeli parents from three social groups, defined 
by the kindergartens children attended: national religious, secular, or 
Jewish-Arab integrated. We assessed parents' and children's beliefs, and 
parents' usage of ethnic attitudinal and categorization markers in a 
book-reading activity. Overall, national religious parents manifested the 
strongest ethnic essentialism and endorsement of anti-negotiations with 
Palestinians, and were the most likely to express negative attitudes and mark 
ethnic categories in their conversations with their children. Moreover, 
regression analyses revealed that ethnic categorization in parents' speech was 
the most reliable predictor of children's ethnic essentialism. Ethnic 
essentialism is transmitted to children not via explicit communication of 
intergroup beliefs or attitudes, but rather via the sheer marking of categories 
in ways that resonate with children's own intuitive ways of conceptualizing the 
social world.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12235
PMID: 25212249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1157. Dev Sci. 2015 Mar;18(2):183-93. doi: 10.1111/desc.12196. Epub 2014 Jul 18.

Numerical representations and intuitions of probabilities at 12 months.

Téglás E(1), Ibanez-Lillo A, Costa A, Bonatti LL.

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Development Center, Central European University, Budapest, Hungary.

Recent research shows that preverbal infants can reason about single-case 
probabilities without relying on observed frequencies, adapting their 
predictions to relevant dynamic parameters of the situation (Téglás, Vul, 
Girotto, Gonzalez, Tenenbaum & Bonatti, ; Téglás, Girotto, Gonzalez & Bonatti, 
). Here we show that intuitions of probabilities may derive from the ability to 
represent a limited number of possibilities. After watching a scene containing 
moving objects of two ensembles, 12-month-olds looked longer at an unlikely than 
at a likely single-case outcome when the objects were within the parallel 
individuation range. However, they did not do so when the scene contained the 
same ratio between ensembles but a larger number of objects. At the same time, 
they could form rational expectations about single-case outcomes in scenes 
containing the same large number of objects when they could exploit subtle 
physical parameters induced by the objects' movements and their spatial 
configuration. Our findings demonstrate that at early stages of development the 
mental representations involved in probability estimations of future individual 
situations are powerful and sophisticated, but at the same time they depend on 
infants' overall cognitive architecture, being constrained by the numerical 
representations spontaneously induced by the situations.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12196
PMID: 25040752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1158. Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):833-40. doi: 10.1111/desc.12207. Epub 2014 Jul 4.

Neonatal imitation predicts how infants engage with faces.

Paukner A(1), Simpson EA, Ferrari PF, Mrozek T, Suomi SJ.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Comparative Ethology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute 
of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Department 
of Health and Human Services, Poolesville, MD, USA.

In human infants, neonatal imitation and preferences for eyes are both 
associated with later social and communicative skills, yet the relationship 
between these abilities remains unexplored. Here we investigated whether 
neonatal imitation predicts facial viewing patterns in infant rhesus macaques. 
We first assessed infant macaques for lipsmacking (a core affiliative gesture) 
and tongue protrusion imitation in the first week of life. When infants were 
10-28 days old, we presented them with an animated macaque avatar displaying a 
still face followed by lipsmacking or tongue protrusion movements. Using eye 
tracking technology, we found that macaque infants generally looked equally at 
the eyes and mouth during gesture presentation, but only lipsmacking-imitators 
showed significantly more looking at the eyes of the neutral still face. These 
results suggest that neonatal imitation performance may be an early measure of 
social attention biases and might potentially facilitate the identification of 
infants at risk for atypical social development.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12207
PMCID: PMC4211944
PMID: 24995706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1159. Dev Sci. 2015 Jan;18(1):119-131. doi: 10.1111/desc.12190. Epub 2014 Jun 24.

Tracing children's vocabulary development from preschool through the school-age 
years: an 8-year longitudinal study.

Song S(#)(1), Su M(#)(1), Kang C(1), Liu H(2), Zhang Y(1)(3), McBride-Chang 
C(4), Tardif T(5), Li H(2), Liang W(6), Zhang Z(6), Shu H(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal 
University, China.
(2)School of Psychology, Beijing Normal University, China.
(3)Department of Psychology, Chengdu Medical College, China.
(4)Department of Psychology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(5)Department of Psychology and Center for Human Growth and Development, 
University of Michigan-Ann Arbor, USA.
(6)Peking University First Hospital, China.
(#)Contributed equally

In this 8-year longitudinal study, we traced the vocabulary growth of Chinese 
children, explored potential precursors of vocabulary knowledge, and 
investigated how vocabulary growth predicted future reading skills. Two hundred 
and sixty-four (264) native Chinese children from Beijing were measured on a 
variety of reading and language tasks over 8 years. Between the ages of 4 to 10 
years, they were administered tasks of vocabulary and related cognitive skills. 
At age 11, comprehensive reading skills, including character recognition, 
reading fluency, and reading comprehension were examined. Individual differences 
in vocabulary developmental profiles were estimated using the intercept-slope 
cluster method. Vocabulary development was then examined in relation to later 
reading outcomes. Three subgroups of lexical growth were classified, namely 
high-high (with a large initial vocabulary size and a fast growth rate), 
low-high (with a small initial vocabulary size and a fast growth rate) and 
low-low (with a small initial vocabulary size and a slow growth rate) groups. 
Low-high and low-low groups were distinguishable mostly through phonological 
skills, morphological skills and other reading-related cognitive skills. 
Childhood vocabulary development (using intercept and slope) explained 
subsequent reading skills. Findings suggest that language-related and 
reading-related cognitive skills differ among groups with different 
developmental trajectories of vocabulary, and the initial size and growth rate 
of vocabulary may be two predictors for later reading development.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12190
PMCID: PMC4276547
PMID: 24962559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1160. Dev Sci. 2015 Jan;18(1):106-18. doi: 10.1111/desc.12189. Epub 2014 May 26.

Neurocognitive mechanisms of learning to read: print tuning in beginning readers 
related to word-reading fluency and semantics but not phonology.

Eberhard-Moscicka AK(1), Jost LB, Raith M, Maurer U.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Division of Cognitive Neuroscience, University of 
Zurich, Switzerland; Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of Zurich and ETH 
Zurich, Switzerland.

During reading acquisition children learn to recognize orthographic stimuli and 
link them to phonology and semantics. The present study investigated 
neurocognitive processes of learning to read after one year of schooling. We 
aimed to elucidate the cognitive processes underlying neural tuning for print 
that has been shown to play an important role for reading and dyslexia. A 
128-channel EEG was recorded while 68 (Swiss-)German monolingual first grade 
children (mean age: 7.6) performed a one-back task with different types of 
letter and false-font strings. Print tuning was indexed by the N1 difference in 
the ERPs between German words and false-font strings, while the N1 lexicality 
effect was indexed by the difference between German words and pseudowords. In 
addition, we measured reading fluency, rapid automatized naming, phonological 
awareness, auditory memory span, and vocabulary. After one year of formal 
reading instruction N1 print tuning was clearly present at the group level, and 
could be detected at the individual level in almost 90% of the children. The N1 
lexicality effect, however, could not be reliably found. On the cognitive level, 
next to word-reading fluency, vocabulary was also associated with N1 print 
tuning, but not measures reflecting phonological processing. These results 
demonstrate the presence of print tuning in the first year of reading 
acquisition and its development at the individual level. Moreover, individual 
differences in print tuning are not only related to word-reading fluency, but 
also to semantic knowledge, indicating that at early stages of learning to read 
the top-down modulation of print tuning is semantic rather than phonological in 
nature.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12189
PMID: 24863157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1161. Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):965-76. doi: 10.1111/desc.12187. Epub 2014 May 8.

Can't stop believing: inhibitory control and resistance to misleading testimony.

Jaswal VK(1), Pérez-Edgar K, Kondrad RL, Palmquist CM, Cole CA, Cole CE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, USA.

Why are some young children consistently willing to believe what they are told 
even when it conflicts with first-hand experience? In this study, we 
investigated the possibility that this deference reflects an inability to 
inhibit a prepotent response. Over the course of several trials, 2.5- to 
3.5-year-olds (N = 58) heard an adult contradict their report of a simple event 
they had both witnessed, and children were asked to resolve this discrepancy. 
Those who repeatedly deferred to the adult's misleading testimony had more 
difficulty on an inhibitory control task involving spatial conflict than those 
who responded more skeptically. These results suggest that responding 
skeptically to testimony that conflicts with first-hand experience may be 
challenging for some young children because it requires inhibiting a normally 
appropriate bias to believe testimony.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12187
PMID: 24806881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1162. Dev Sci. 2014 Jul;17(4):553-63. doi: 10.1111/desc.12078. Epub 2014 Apr 28.

Children's learning of number words in an indigenous farming-foraging group.

Piantadosi ST(1), Jara-Ettinger J, Gibson E.

Author information:
(1)Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester, USA.

We show that children in the Tsimane', a farming-foraging group in the Bolivian 
rain-forest, learn number words along a similar developmental trajectory to 
children from industrialized countries. Tsimane' children successively acquire 
the first three or four number words before fully learning how counting works. 
However, their learning is substantially delayed relative to children from the 
United States, Russia, and Japan. The presence of a similar developmental 
trajectory likely indicates that the incremental stages of numerical knowledge - 
but not their timing - reflect a fundamental property of number concept 
acquisition which is relatively independent of language, culture, age, and early 
education.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12078
PMID: 24766463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1163. Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):841-57. doi: 10.1111/desc.12163. Epub 2014 Apr 23.

Learning to imitate individual finger movements by the human neonate.

Nagy E(1), Pal A, Orvos H.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Dundee, UK.

Imitation in human neonates, unlike imitation in young infants, is still 
regarded as controversial. Four studies with 203 newborns are presented to 
examine the imitation of index finger, two- and three-finger movements in human 
neonates. Results found differential imitations of all three modelled gestures, 
a left-handed pattern, and a rapid learning mechanism. The lateralized 
behavioural pattern suggests the involvement of a right lateralized neural 
network, and the mechanisms described in this study - (i) the accurate imitation 
of all aspects of the model's movements, (ii) the rapid learning component, and 
the (iii) the early sensitive period might fulfil the criteria for filial 
imprinting.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12163
PMID: 24754667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1164. Dev Sci. 2015 Jan;18(1):80-9. doi: 10.1111/desc.12183. Epub 2014 Apr 7.

Surprise! Infants consider possible bases of generalization for a single input 
example.

Gerken L(1), Dawson C, Chatila R, Tenenbaum J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Arizona, USA.

Infants have been shown to generalize from a small number of input examples. 
However, existing studies allow two possible means of generalization. One is via 
a process of noting similarities shared by several examples. Alternatively, 
generalization may reflect an implicit desire to explain the input. The latter 
view suggests that generalization might occur when even a single input example 
is surprising, given the learner's current model of the domain. To test the 
possibility that infants are able to generalize based on a single example, we 
familiarized 9-month-olds with a single three-syllable input example that 
contained either one surprising feature (syllable repetition, Experiment 1) or 
two features (repetition and a rare syllable, Experiment 2). In both 
experiments, infants generalized only to new strings that maintained all of the 
surprising features from familiarization. This research suggests that surprise 
can promote very rapid generalization.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12183
PMCID: PMC4188806
PMID: 24703007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1165. Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):880-91. doi: 10.1111/desc.12172. Epub 2014 Apr 7.

Look who's talking: speech style and social context in language input to infants 
are linked to concurrent and future speech development.

Ramírez-Esparza N(1), García-Sierra A, Kuhl PK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut, USA.

Language input is necessary for language learning, yet little is known about 
whether, in natural environments, the speech style and social context of 
language input to children impacts language development. In the present study we 
investigated the relationship between language input and language development, 
examining both the style of parental speech, comparing 'parentese' speech to 
standard speech, and the social context in which speech is directed to children, 
comparing one-on-one (1:1) to group social interactions. Importantly, the 
language input variables were assessed at home using digital first-person 
perspective recordings of the infants' auditory environment as they went about 
their daily lives (N =26, 11- and 14-months-old). We measured language 
development using (a) concurrent speech utterances, and (b) word production at 
24 months. Parentese speech in 1:1 contexts is positively correlated with both 
concurrent speech and later word production. Mediation analyses further show 
that the effect of parentese speech-1:1 on infants' later language is mediated 
by concurrent speech. Our results suggest that both the social context and the 
style of speech in language addressed to children are strongly linked to a 
child's future language development.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12172
PMCID: PMC4188803
PMID: 24702819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1166. Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):977-83. doi: 10.1111/desc.12171. Epub 2014 Mar 17.

Follow the liar: the effects of adult lies on children's honesty.

Hays C(1), Carver LJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, USA.

Recent research shows that most adults admit they lie to children. We also know 
that children learn through modeling and imitation. To date there are no 
published studies that examine whether lying to children has an effect on 
children's honesty. We aimed to bridge the gap in this literature by examining 
the effects of adults' lies on elementary and preschool-aged children's behavior 
using a modified temptation resistance paradigm, in which children are tempted 
to peek at a toy they have been told not to look at, and later given a chance to 
either admit peeking, or try to conceal their transgression by lying. Prior to 
being tested, half of the children were told a lie and half were not. We then 
measured both cheating (peeking) and lie-telling behaviors. We hypothesized that 
lying to a child would increase the likelihood that they would both peek at the 
toy and lie about having done so. Results showed that school-age children were 
more likely to peek if they had been lied to, and were also more likely to lie 
about peeking. In contrast with the school-age children, there was no difference 
in peeking or lying for preschoolers who were and were not lied to. These 
results have important implications for parenting and educational settings.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12171
PMID: 24636361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1167. Dev Sci. 2014 Sep;17(5):797-807. doi: 10.1111/desc.12168. Epub 2014 Mar 17.

Previous reward decreases errors of commission on later 'No-Go' trials in 
children 4 to 12 years of age: evidence for a context monitoring account.

Winter W(1), Sheridan M.

Author information:
(1)Harvard Medical School, USA.

Inhibitory control is widely hypothesized to be the cornerstone of executive 
function in childhood and the central deficit in a number of developmental 
disorders, including attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). However, 
recent evidence from adults indicates that performance on response inhibition 
tasks may primarily reflect non-inhibitory attentional control (context 
monitoring) processes. Yet it may be that inhibition plays a more central role 
in childhood - a time when the architecture of cognitive processes might be more 
transparent due to wide variability in skill level. Here we directly test 
inhibitory and context monitoring explanations of task performance on a Go/No-Go 
task in a large group of children 4-12 years of age. We conclude that 
traditional inhibitory conceptualizations of task performance on the Go/No-Go 
task cannot account for our findings, calling into question evidence supporting 
a central role for inhibitory control in cognitive development or developmental 
psychopathology.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12168
PMCID: PMC4146709
PMID: 24636228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1168. Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):948-55. doi: 10.1111/desc.12164. Epub 2014 Mar 13.

Implicit meaning in 18-month-old toddlers.

Delle Luche C(1), Durrant S, Floccia C, Plunkett K.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Plymouth University, UK.

A substantial body of evidence demonstrates that infants understand the meaning 
of spoken words from as early as 6 months. Yet little is known about their 
ability to do so in the absence of any visual referent, which would offer 
diagnostic evidence for an adult-like, symbolic interpretation of words and 
their use in language mediated thought. We used the head-turn preference 
procedure to examine whether infants can generate implicit meanings from word 
forms alone as early as 18 months of age, and whether they are sensitive to 
meaningful relationships between words. In one condition, toddlers were 
presented with lists of words taken from the same taxonomic category (e.g. 
animals or body parts). In a second condition, words taken from two other 
categories (e.g. clothes and food items) were interleaved within the same list. 
Listening times were found to be longer in the related-category condition than 
in the mixed-category condition, suggesting that infants extract the meaning of 
spoken words and are sensitive to the semantic relatedness between these words. 
Our results show that infants have begun to construct the rudiments of a 
semantic system based on taxonomic relations even before they enter a period of 
accelerated vocabulary growth.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12164
PMID: 24628995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1169. Dev Sci. 2015 Jan;18(1):38-49. doi: 10.1111/desc.12177. Epub 2014 Mar 3.

Young children 'solve for x' using the Approximate Number System.

Kibbe MM(1), Feigenson L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, USA.

The Approximate Number System (ANS) supports basic arithmetic computation in 
early childhood, but it is unclear whether the ANS also supports the more 
complex computations introduced later in formal education. 'Solving for x' in 
addend-unknown problems is notoriously difficult for children, who often 
struggle with these types of problems well into high school. Here we asked 
whether 4-6-year-old children could solve for an unknown addend using the ANS. 
We presented problems either symbolically, using Arabic numerals or verbal 
number words, or non-symbolically, using collections of objects while preventing 
verbal counting. Across five experiments, children failed to identify the value 
of the unknown addend when problems were presented symbolically, but succeeded 
when problems were presented non-symbolically. Our results suggest that, well 
before formal exposure to unknown-addend problems, children appear to 'solve for 
x' in an intuitive way, using the ANS.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12177
PMCID: PMC4394201
PMID: 24589420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1170. Dev Sci. 2014 Sep;17(5):775-85. doi: 10.1111/desc.12155. Epub 2014 Feb 27.

Early predictors of middle school fraction knowledge.

Bailey DH(1), Siegler RS, Geary DC.

Author information:
(1)Psychology Department, Carnegie Mellon University, USA.

Recent findings that earlier fraction knowledge predicts later mathematics 
achievement raise the question of what predicts later fraction knowledge. 
Analyses of longitudinal data indicated that whole number magnitude knowledge in 
first grade predicted knowledge of fraction magnitudes in middle school, 
controlling for whole number arithmetic proficiency, domain general cognitive 
abilities, parental income and education, race, and gender. Similarly, knowledge 
of whole number arithmetic in first grade predicted knowledge of fraction 
arithmetic in middle school, controlling for whole number magnitude knowledge in 
first grade and the other control variables. In contrast, neither type of early 
whole number knowledge uniquely predicted middle school reading achievement. We 
discuss the implications of these findings for theories of numerical development 
and for improving mathematics learning.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12155
PMCID: PMC4146696
PMID: 24576209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1171. Dev Sci. 2014 Sep;17(5):766-74. doi: 10.1111/desc.12151. Epub 2014 Feb 27.

Neural specialization for speech in the first months of life.

Shultz S(1), Vouloumanos A, Bennett RH, Pelphrey K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, USA.

How does the brain's response to speech change over the first months of life? 
Although behavioral findings indicate that neonates' listening biases are 
sharpened over the first months of life, with a species-specific preference for 
speech emerging by 3 months, the neural substrates underlying this developmental 
change are unknown. We examined neural responses to speech compared with 
biological non-speech sounds in 1- to 4-month-old infants using fMRI. Infants 
heard speech and biological non-speech sounds, including heterospecific 
vocalizations and human non-speech. We observed a left-lateralized response in 
temporal cortex for speech compared to biological non-speech sounds, indicating 
that this region is highly selective for speech by the first month of life. 
Specifically, this brain region becomes increasingly selective for speech over 
the next 3 months as neural substrates become less responsive to non-speech 
sounds. These results reveal specific changes in neural responses during a 
developmental period characterized by rapid behavioral changes.

© 2014 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12151
PMCID: PMC4232861
PMID: 24576182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1172. Dev Sci. 2014 Jul;17(4):481-91. doi: 10.1111/desc.12149. Epub 2014 Feb 27.

Infants track word forms in early word-object associations.

Zamuner TS(1), Fais L, Werker JF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Linguistics, University of Ottawa, Canada.

A central component of language development is word learning. One 
characterization of this process is that language learners discover objects and 
then look for word forms to associate with these objects (Mcnamara, 1984; Smith, 
2000). Another possibility is that word forms themselves are also important, 
such that once learned, hearing a familiar word form will lead young word 
learners to look for an object to associate with it (Juscyzk, 1997). This 
research investigates the relative weighing of word forms and objects in early 
word-object associations using the anticipatory eye-movement paradigm (AEM; 
McMurray & Aslin, 2004). Eighteen-month-old infants and adults were taught novel 
word-object associations and then tested on ambiguous stimuli that pitted word 
forms and objects against each other. Results revealed a change in weighing of 
these components across development. For 18-month-old infants, word forms 
weighed more in early word-object associative learning, while for adults, 
objects were more salient. Our results suggest that infants preferentially use 
word forms to guide the process of word-object association.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12149
PMID: 24576138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1173. Dev Sci. 2014 Jul;17(4):621-7. doi: 10.1111/desc.12146. Epub 2014 Feb 27.

Detecting 'infant-directedness' in face and voice.

Kim HI(1), Johnson SP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, USA.

Five- and 3-month-old infants' perception of infant-directed (ID) faces and the 
role of speech in perceiving faces were examined. Infants' eye movements were 
recorded as they viewed a series of two side-by-side talking faces, one 
infant-directed and one adult-directed (AD), while listening to ID speech, AD 
speech, or in silence. Infants showed consistently greater dwell time on ID 
faces vs. AD faces, and this ID face preference was consistent across all three 
sound conditions. ID speech resulted in higher looking overall, but it did not 
increase looking at the ID face per se. Together, these findings demonstrate 
that infants' preferences for ID speech extend to ID faces.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12146
PMCID: PMC4069237
PMID: 24576091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1174. Dev Sci. 2014 May;17(3):434-42. doi: 10.1111/desc.12135. Epub 2014 Jan 11.

Arithmetic facts storage deficit: the hypersensitivity-to-interference in memory 
hypothesis.

De Visscher A(1), Noël MP.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Neurosciences Cognition et Système, Institut de Recherche en 
Sciences Psychologiques, Université Catholique de Louvain, Belgium.

Dyscalculia, or mathematics learning disorders, is currently known to be 
heterogeneous (Wilson & Dehaene, ). While various profiles of dyscalculia 
coexist, a general and persistent hallmark of this math learning disability is 
the difficulty in memorizing arithmetic facts (Geary, Hoard & Hamson, ; Jordan & 
Montani, ; Slade & Russel, ). Arithmetic facts are simple arithmetic problems 
that are solved by direct retrieval from memory. Recently, De Visscher and Noël 
() showed hypersensitivity-to-interference in memory in an adult suffering from 
a specific deficit of arithmetic facts storage. According to the authors, 
arithmetic facts share many features. The overlapping of these features between 
arithmetic facts may provoke interference. Consequently, learners who are 
hypersensitive-to-interference could have considerable difficulties in storing 
arithmetic facts. The present study aims at testing this new hypothesis on 
fourth-grade children who are learning multiplication tables. Among 101 children 
that were assessed, 23 low arithmetic facts learners were selected because of 
their low score in arithmetic facts fluency (controlling for processing speed). 
Twenty-three control children were selected, matched for classroom, gender, and 
age. In addition to a subtest of global reasoning, these participants were given 
a multiplication production task and a memorization task of low- and 
high-interference associations. The results show that children with low 
arithmetic fluencies experience hypersensitivity-to-interference in memory 
compared with children with typical arithmetic fluencies.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12135
PMID: 24410798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1175. Dev Sci. 2014 May;17(3):412-23. doi: 10.1111/desc.12130. Epub 2014 Jan 11.

Shared understanding and idiosyncratic expression in early vocabularies.

Mayor J(1), Plunkett K.

Author information:
(1)FPSE, University of Geneva, Switzerland.

To what extent do toddlers have shared vocabularies? We examined CDI data 
collected from 14,607 infants and toddlers in five countries and measured the 
amount of variability between individual lexicons during development for both 
comprehension and production. Early lexicons are highly overlapping. However, 
beyond 100 words, toddlers share more words with other toddlers in comprehension 
than in production, even when matched for lexicon sizes. This finding points to 
a structural difference in early comprehension and production: Toddlers are 
generalists in comprehension but develop a unique, expressive voice. Variability 
in production decreases after two years of age, suggesting convergence to a 
common expressive core vocabulary. We discuss potential exogenous and endogenous 
contributions to the inverted U-shaped development observed in young children's 
expressive lexical variability.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12130
PMID: 24410758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1176. Dev Sci. 2014 Jan;17(1):86-93. doi: 10.1111/desc.12094. Epub 2013 Sep 5.

Resting gamma power is linked to reading ability in adolescents.

Tierney A(1), Strait DL, Kraus N.

Author information:
(1)Auditory Neuroscience Laboratory, Northwestern University, USA.

Infants who have more power within the gamma frequency range at rest develop 
better language and cognitive abilities over their first 3 years of life 
(Benasich et al., 2008). This positive trend may reflect the gradual increase in 
resting gamma power that peaks at about 4 years (Takano & Ogawa, 1998): infants 
further along the maturational curve may exhibit both increased resting gamma 
power and more advanced language and cognitive function. Similar to other neural 
characteristics such as synaptic density, resting gamma power subsequently 
decreases with further development into adulthood (Tierney, Strait, O'Connell & 
Kraus, 2013). If previously reported relationships between resting gamma power 
and behavioral performance reflect variance in maturation, at least in part, 
negative correlations between resting gamma and behavior may predominate in 
later developmental stages, during which resting gamma activity is decreasing. 
We tested this prediction by examining resting gamma activity and 
language-dependent behavioral performance, reflected by a variety of 
reading-related tests, in adolescents between the ages of 14 and 15 years. 
Consistent with our predictions, resting gamma power inversely related to every 
aspect of reading assessed (i.e. reading fluency, rapid naming, and basic 
reading proficiency). Our results suggest that resting gamma power acts as an 
index of maturational progress in adolescents.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12094
PMID: 24341975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1177. Dev Sci. 2014 May;17(3):388-95. doi: 10.1111/desc.12129. Epub 2013 Dec 7.

Crawling and walking infants elicit different verbal responses from mothers.

Karasik LB(1), Tamis-Lemonda CS, Adolph KE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The College of Staten Island and the Graduate 
Center of the City University of New York, USA.

We examined mothers' verbal responses to their crawling or walking infants' 
object sharing (i.e. bids). Fifty mothers and their 13-month-olds were observed 
for 1 hour at home. Infants bid from a stationary position or they bid after 
carrying the object to their mothers. Mothers responded with affirmations (e.g. 
'thank you'), descriptions ('red box'), or action directives ('open it'). 
Infants' locomotor status and the form of their bids predicted how mothers 
responded. Mothers of walkers responded with action directives more often than 
mothers of crawlers. Notably, differences in the responses of mothers of walkers 
versus those of crawlers were explained by differences in bid form between the 
two groups of infants. Walkers were more likely to engage in moving bids than 
crawlers, who typically shared objects from stationary positions. When crawlers 
displayed moving bids, their mothers offered action directives just as often as 
did mothers of walkers. Findings illustrate developmental cascades, wherein 
Infants' locomotor status affects how infants share objects with mothers, which 
in turn shapes mothers' verbal responses.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12129
PMCID: PMC3997624
PMID: 24314018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1178. Dev Sci. 2014 Mar;17(2):298-310. doi: 10.1111/desc.12111. Epub 2013 Nov 15.

Why computational models are better than verbal theories: the case of nonword 
repetition.

Jones G(1), Gobet F, Freudenthal D, Watson SE, Pine JM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Psychology, Nottingham Trent University, UK.

Tests of nonword repetition (NWR) have often been used to examine children's 
phonological knowledge and word learning abilities. However, theories of NWR 
primarily explain performance either in terms of phonological working memory or 
long-term knowledge, with little consideration of how these processes interact. 
One theoretical account that focuses specifically on the interaction between 
short-term and long-term memory is the chunking hypothesis. Chunking occurs 
because of repeated exposure to meaningful stimulus items, resulting in the 
items becoming grouped (or chunked); once chunked, the items can be represented 
in short-term memory using one chunk rather than one chunk per item. We tested 
several predictions of the chunking hypothesis by presenting 5-6-year-old 
children with three tests of NWR that were either high, medium, or low in 
wordlikeness. The results did not show strong support for the chunking 
hypothesis, suggesting that chunking fails to fully explain children's NWR 
behavior. However, simulations using a computational implementation of chunking 
(namely CLASSIC, or Chunking Lexical And Sub-lexical Sequences In Children) show 
that, when the linguistic input to 5-6-year-old children is estimated in a 
reasonable way, the children's data are matched across all three NWR tests. 
These results have three implications for the field: (a) a chunking account can 
explain key NWR phenomena in 5-6-year-old children; (b) tests of chunking 
accounts require a detailed specification both of the chunking mechanism itself 
and of the input on which the chunking mechanism operates; and (c) verbal 
theories emphasizing the role of long-term knowledge (such as chunking) are not 
precise enough to make detailed predictions about experimental data, but 
computational implementations of the theories can bridge the gap.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12111
PMID: 24238080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1179. Dev Sci. 2014 Mar;17(2):311-9. doi: 10.1111/desc.12105. Epub 2013 Nov 11.

Religion insulates ingroup evaluations: the development of intergroup attitudes 
in India.

Dunham Y(1), Srinivasan M, Dotsch R, Barner D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, USA.

Research on the development of implicit intergroup attitudes has placed heavy 
emphasis on race, leaving open how social categories that are prominent in other 
cultures might operate. We investigate two of India's primary means of social 
distinction, caste and religion, and explore the development of implicit and 
explicit attitudes towards these groups in minority-status Muslim children and 
majority-status Hindu children, the latter drawn from various positions in the 
Hindu caste system. Results from two tests of implicit attitudes find that caste 
attitudes parallel previous findings for race: higher-caste children as well as 
lower-caste children have robust high-caste preferences. However, results for 
religion were strikingly different: both lower-status Muslim children and 
higher-status Hindu children show strong implicit ingroup preferences. We 
suggest that religion may play a protective role in insulating children from the 
internalization of stigma.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12105
PMID: 24205988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1180. Dev Sci. 2014 Jan;17(1):94-109. doi: 10.1111/desc.12097. Epub 2013 Sep 30.

Influences of vowel and tone variation on emergent word knowledge: a 
cross-linguistic investigation.

Singh L(1), Hui TJ, Chan C, Golinkoff RM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, National University of Singapore, Singapore.

To learn words, infants must be sensitive to native phonological contrast. While 
lexical tone predominates as a source of phonemic contrast in human languages, 
there has been little investigation of the influences of lexical tone on word 
learning. The present study investigates infants' sensitivity to tone 
mispronunciations in two groups of infants. For one group (Chinese learners), 
tone is phonemic in their native language, and for the second group (English 
learners), tone is non-phonemic and constituted suprasegmental variation. In 
Experiment 1, English learners were trained on novel word-object pairings and 
tested on their recognition of correct pronunciations, tone and vowel 
mispronunciations of these words at 18 and 24 months. In Experiment 2a, 
bilingual English-Chinese learners were tested on a similar task translated into 
Chinese at the same age intervals. Results demonstrate that non-tonal learners 
treated tonal and vowel substitutions alike as mispronunciations at 18 months 
but only treated vowel substitutions as mispronunciations at 24 months. Tonal 
learners treated both tonal and vowel substitutions as mispronunciations at both 
ages. In Experiment 2b, bilingual non-tone language learners were tested on the 
same set of tasks replicating a similar set of results as monolingual non-tone 
language learners (Experiment 1). Findings point to an early predisposition to 
treat tone as a defining characteristic of words regardless of its lexical 
relevance at 18 months. Between 18 and 24 months, learners appear to ascribe 
lexical relevance to tone in a language-specific manner. The current study 
identifies the influences of tone variation on memories for newly learned words 
and the time period during which lexical tone - a highly frequent constituent of 
human languages - actually becomes lexical for early learners. Findings are 
contextualized with prevailing models of the developing lexicon.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12097
PMID: 24118787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1181. Dev Sci. 2013 Nov;16(6):952-8. doi: 10.1111/desc.12086. Epub 2013 Aug 7.

Young children care more about their reputation with ingroup members and 
potential reciprocators.

Engelmann JM(1), Over H, Herrmann E, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.

Human cooperation depends on individuals caring about their reputation, and so 
they sometimes attempt to manage them strategically. Here we show that even 
5-year-old children strategically manage their reputation. In an experimental 
setting, children shared significantly more resources with an anonymous 
recipient when (1) the child watching them could reciprocate later, and (2) the 
child watching them was an ingroup rather than an outgroup member (as 
established by minimal group markers). This study is not only the first to show 
that young children selectively invest in their reputation with specific 
individuals, but also the first to show that we care more about our reputation 
with ingroup than with outgroup members.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12086
PMID: 24118719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1182. Dev Sci. 2013 Nov;16(6):894-904. doi: 10.1111/desc.12091. Epub 2013 Aug 27.

Of hissing snakes and angry voices: human infants are differentially responsive 
to evolutionary fear-relevant sounds.

Erlich N(1), Lipp OV, Slaughter V.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Queensland, Australia.

Adult humans demonstrate differential processing of stimuli that were recurrent 
threats to safety and survival throughout evolutionary history. Recent studies 
suggest that differential processing of evolutionarily ancient threats occurs in 
human infants, leading to the proposal of an inborn mechanism for rapid 
identification of, and response to, evolutionary fear-relevant stimuli. The 
current study provides novel data in support of this proposal, showing for the 
first time that human infants differentially process evolutionary threats 
presented in the auditory modality. Sixty-one 9-month-olds listened to 
evolutionary fear-relevant, modern fear-relevant, and pleasant sounds, while 
their heart rate, startle, and visual orienting behaviours were measured. 
Infants demonstrated significantly enhanced heart rate deceleration, larger 
eye-blinks, and more visual orienting when listening to evolutionary 
fear-relevant sounds compared to sounds from the other two categories. These 
results support the proposal that human infants possess evolved mechanisms for 
the differential processing of a range of ancient environmental threats.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12091
PMID: 24118715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1183. Dev Sci. 2013 Nov;16(6):879-93. doi: 10.1111/desc.12067. Epub 2013 May 28.

Domain-specific impulsivity in school-age children.

Tsukayama E(1), Duckworth AL, Kim B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, USA.

Impulsivity is a salient individual difference in children with well-established 
predictive validity for life outcomes. The current investigation proposes that 
impulsive behaviors vary systematically by domain. In a series of studies with 
ethnically and socioeconomically diverse samples of middle school students, we 
find that schoolwork-related and interpersonal-related impulsivity, as observed 
by teachers, parents, and the students themselves, are distinct, moderately 
correlated behavioral tendencies. Each demonstrates differentiated relationships 
with dimensions of childhood temperament, Big Five personality factors, and 
outcomes, such as report card grades. Implications for theoretical conceptions 
of impulsivity as well as for practical applications (e.g. domain-specific 
interventions) are discussed.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12067
PMCID: PMC3800044
PMID: 24118714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1184. Dev Sci. 2013 Nov;16(6):864-78. doi: 10.1111/desc.12058. Epub 2013 Jun 8.

The development of stranger fear in infancy and toddlerhood: normative 
development, individual differences, antecedents, and outcomes.

Brooker RJ(1), Buss KA, Lemery-Chalfant K, Aksan N, Davidson RJ, Goldsmith HH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin - Madison, USA.

Despite implications that stranger fear is an important aspect of developing 
behavioral inhibition, a known risk factor for anxiety, normative and atypical 
developmental trajectories of stranger fear across infancy and toddlerhood 
remain understudied. We used a large, longitudinal data set (N = 1285) including 
multi-trait, multi-method assessments of temperament to examine the normative 
course of development for stranger fear and to explore the possibility that 
individual differences exist in trajectories of stranger fear development 
between 6 and 36 months of age. A latent class growth analysis suggested four 
different trajectories of stranger fear during this period. Stable, high levels 
of stranger fear over time were associated with poorer RSA suppression at 6 
months of age. Rates of concordance in trajectory-based class membership for 
identical (monozygotic) and fraternal (dizygotic) twins, along with associations 
between atypical stranger fear development and greater anxiety-related maternal 
characteristics, suggested that individual differences in developmental 
trajectories of stranger fear may be heritable. Importantly, trajectories of 
stranger fear during infancy and toddlerhood were linked to individual 
differences in behavioral inhibition, with chronically high levels of stranger 
fear and sharp increases in stranger fear over time related to greater levels of 
inhibition than other developmental trajectories.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12058
PMCID: PMC4129944
PMID: 24118713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1185. Dev Sci. 2013 Nov;16(6):915-25. doi: 10.1111/desc.12068. Epub 2013 Jul 8.

Does working memory training lead to generalized improvements in children with 
low working memory? A randomized controlled trial.

Dunning DL(1), Holmes J, Gathercole SE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of York, UK.

Children with low working memory typically make poor educational progress, and 
it has been speculated that difficulties in meeting the heavy working memory 
demands of the classroom may be a contributory factor. Intensive working memory 
training has been shown to boost performance on untrained memory tasks in a 
variety of populations. This first randomized controlled trial with low working 
memory children investigated whether the benefits of training extend beyond 
standard working memory tasks to other more complex activities typical of the 
classroom in which working memory plays a role, as well as to other cognitive 
skills and developing academic abilities. Children aged 7-9 years received 
either adaptive working memory training, non-adaptive working memory training 
with low memory loads, or no training. Adaptive training was associated with 
selective improvements in multiple untrained tests of working memory, with no 
evidence of changes in classroom analogues of activities that tax working 
memory, or any other cognitive assessments. Gains in verbal working memory were 
sustained one year after training. Thus the benefits of working memory training 
delivered in this way may not extend beyond structured working memory tasks.

© 2013 The Authors Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12068
PMCID: PMC4232921
PMID: 24093880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1186. Dev Sci. 2013 Sep;16(5):772-91. doi: 10.1111/desc.12057. Epub 2013 Jun 11.

Mapping subcortical brain maturation during adolescence: evidence of hemisphere- 
and sex-specific longitudinal changes.

Dennison M(1), Whittle S, Yücel M, Vijayakumar N, Kline A, Simmons J, Allen NB.

Author information:
(1)Melbourne School of Psychological Sciences, University of Melbourne, 
Australia.

Early to mid-adolescence is an important developmental period for subcortical 
brain maturation, but longitudinal studies of these neurodevelopmental changes 
are lacking. The present study acquired repeated magnetic resonance images from 
60 adolescent subjects (28 female) at ages 12.5 and 16.5 years to map changes in 
subcortical structure volumes. Automated segmentation techniques optimized for 
longitudinal measurement were used to delineate volumes of the caudate, putamen, 
nucleus accumbens, pallidum, hippocampus, thalamus and the whole brain. Amygdala 
volumes were described using manual tracing methods. The results revealed 
heterogeneous maturation across the regions of interest (ROIs), and change was 
differentially moderated by sex and hemisphere. The caudate, thalamus and 
putamen declined in volume, more for females relative to males, and decreases in 
the putamen and thalamus were greater in the left hemisphere. The pallidum 
increased in size, but more so in the left hemisphere. While the left nucleus 
accumbens increased in size, the right accumbens decreased in size over the 
follow-up period. Increases in hippocampal volume were greater in the right 
hemisphere. While amygdala volume did not change over time, the left hemisphere 
was consistently larger than the right. These results suggest that subcortical 
brain development from early to middle adolescence is characterized by striking 
hemispheric specialization and sexual dimorphisms, and provide a framework for 
interpreting normal and abnormal changes in cognition, affect and behavior. 
Moreover, the differences in findings compared to previous cross-sectional 
research emphasize the importance of within-subject assessment of brain 
development during adolescence.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12057
PMID: 24033581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1187. Dev Sci. 2013 Sep;16(5):688-96. doi: 10.1111/desc.12082. Epub 2013 Jul 30.

Childhood poverty, chronic stress, and young adult working memory: the 
protective role of self-regulatory capacity.

Evans GW(1), Fuller-Rowell TE.

Author information:
(1)Human Ecology, Cornell University, USA.

Prior research shows that childhood poverty as well as chronic stress can damage 
children's executive functioning (EF) capacities, including working memory. 
However, it is also clear that not all children suffer the same degree of 
adverse consequences from risk exposure. We show that chronic stress early in 
life (ages 9-13) links childhood poverty from birth to age 13 to young adult 
working memory. However, 9-year-olds high in self-regulatory capacity, assessed 
by a standard delay of gratification protocol, are protected from such insults. 
Self-regulatory skills may afford the developing prefrontal cortex some 
protection from childhood poverty.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12082
PMID: 24033574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1188. Dev Sci. 2013 Sep;16(5):653-64. doi: 10.1111/desc.12077. Epub 2013 Jun 25.

Higher education is an age-independent predictor of white matter integrity and 
cognitive control in late adolescence.

Noble KG(1), Korgaonkar MS, Grieve SM, Brickman AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, USA; Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, Columbia University, USA.

Socioeconomic status is an important predictor of cognitive development and 
academic achievement. Late adolescence provides a unique opportunity to study 
how the attainment of socioeconomic status (in the form of years of education) 
relates to cognitive and neural development, during a time when age-related 
cognitive and neural development is ongoing. During late adolescence it is 
possible to disambiguate age- and education-related effects on the development 
of these processes. Here we assessed the degree to which higher educational 
attainment was related to performance on a cognitive control task, controlling 
for age. We then used diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) to assess the degree to 
which white matter microstructure might mediate this relationship. When 
covarying age, significant associations were found between educational 
attainment and fractional anisotropy (FA) in the superior longitudinal 
fasciculus (SLF) and cingulum bundle (CB). Further, when covarying age, FA in 
these regions was associated with cognitive control. Finally, mediation analyses 
revealed that the age-independent association between educational attainment and 
cognitive control was completely accounted for by FA in these regions. The 
uncinate fasciculus, a late-myelinated control region not implicated in 
cognitive control, did not mediate this effect.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12077
PMCID: PMC3775010
PMID: 24033571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1189. Dev Sci. 2013 Jul;16(4):584-98. doi: 10.1111/desc.12053. Epub 2013 Mar 18.

Bridging developmental systems theory and evolutionary psychology using dynamic 
optimization.

Frankenhuis WE(1), Panchanathan K, Clark Barrett H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Psychology, Behavioural Science Institute, 
Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands. wfrankenhuis@gmail.com

Interactions between evolutionary psychologists and developmental systems 
theorists have been largely antagonistic. This is unfortunate because potential 
synergies between the two approaches remain unexplored. This article presents a 
method that may help to bridge the divide, and that has proven fruitful in 
biology: dynamic optimization. Dynamic optimization integrates developmental 
systems theorists' focus on dynamics and contingency with the 'design stance' of 
evolutionary psychology. It provides a theoretical framework as well as a set of 
tools for exploring the properties of developmental systems that natural 
selection might favor, given particular evolutionary ecologies. We also discuss 
limitations of the approach.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12053
PMID: 23786476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1190. Dev Sci. 2013 Jul;16(4):564-73. doi: 10.1111/desc.12052. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Early access to abstract representations in developing readers: evidence from 
masked priming.

Perea M(1), Mallouh RA, Carreiras M.

Author information:
(1)ERI Lectura and Departamento de Metodología, Universitat de València, Spain. 
mperea@valencia.edu

A commonly shared assumption in the field of visual-word recognition is that 
retinotopic representations are rapidly converted into abstract representations. 
Here we examine the role of visual form vs. abstract representations during the 
early stages of word processing - as measured by masked priming - in young 
children (3rd and 6th Graders) and adult readers. To maximize the chances of 
detecting an effect of visual form, we employed a language with a very intricate 
orthography, Arabic. If visual form plays a role in the early stages of 
processing, greater benefit would be expected from related primes that have the 
same visual form (in terms of the ligation pattern between a word's letters) as 
the target word (e.g.- [ktz b-ktA b] - note that the three initial letters are 
connected in prime and target) than for those that do not (- [ktxb-ktA b]). 
Results showed that the magnitude of priming effect relative to an unrelated 
condition (e.g. -) was remarkably similar for both types of prime. Thus, despite 
the visual complexity of Arabic orthography, there is fast access to the 
abstract letter representations not only in adult readers by also in developing 
readers.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12052
PMCID: PMC3832781
PMID: 23786474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1191. Dev Sci. 2013 Jul;16(4):531-41. doi: 10.1111/desc.12050. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Effortful control and parenting: associations with HPA axis reactivity in early 
childhood.

Kryski KR(1), Dougherty LR, Dyson MW, Olino TM, Laptook RS, Klein DN, Hayden EP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Western University, Canada. kkryski2@uwo.ca

While activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis is an adaptive 
response to stress, excessive HPA axis reactivity may be an important marker of 
childhood vulnerability to psychopathology. Parenting, including parent affect 
during parent-child interactions, may play an important role in shaping the 
developing HPA system; however, the association of parent affect may be 
moderated by child factors, especially children's emerging self-regulatory 
skills. We therefore tested the relationship between parent affectivity and 160 
preschoolers' cortisol reactivity during a laboratory visit, examining 
children's effortful control (EC) as a moderator. Greater parent negative 
affectivity was related to greater initial and increasing cortisol over time, 
but only when children were low in EC. Higher parent positive affectivity was 
related to a higher baseline cortisol for children with low EC and lower 
baseline cortisol for children with high EC. Results indicate that children's EC 
moderates the extent to which parent affect shapes stress reactive systems in 
early childhood.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12050
PMCID: PMC3694747
PMID: 23786471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1192. Dev Sci. 2013 Jul;16(4):515-30. doi: 10.1111/desc.12046. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

The role of parenting and dopamine D4 receptor gene polymorphisms in children's 
inhibitory control.

Smith HJ(1), Kryski KR, Sheikh HI, Singh SM, Hayden EP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Western, Ontario, Canada. 
hsmith53@uwo.ca

Temperamental effortful control has important implications for children's 
development. Although genetic factors and parenting may influence effortful 
control, few studies have examined interplay between the two in predicting its 
development. The current study investigated associations between parenting and a 
facet of children's effortful control, inhibitory control (IC), and whether 
these associations were moderated by whether children had a 7-repeat variant of 
the DRD4 exon III VNTR. A community sample of 409 3-year-olds completed 
behavioural tasks to assess IC, and observational measures of parenting were 
also collected. Negative parenting was associated with lower child IC. The 
association between children's IC and positive parenting was moderated by 
children's DRD4 7-repeat status, such that children with at least one 7-repeat 
allele displayed lower IC than children without this allele when positive 
parenting was lower. These effects appeared to be primarily influenced by parent 
support and engagement. Results extend recent findings suggesting that some 
genetic polymorphisms may increase vulnerability to contextual influences.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12046
PMID: 23786470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1193. Dev Sci. 2013 May;16(3):409-27. doi: 10.1111/desc.12026.

Parental rearing behavior prospectively predicts adolescents' risky 
decision-making and feedback-related electrical brain activity.

Euser AS(1), Evans BE, Greaves-Lord K, Huizink AC, Franken IH.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychology, Erasmus University Rotterdam, 3000 DR Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands. euser@fsw.eur.nl

The present study examined the role of parental rearing behavior in adolescents' 
risky decision-making and the brain's feedback processing mechanisms. Healthy 
adolescent participants (n = 110) completed the EMBU-C, a self-report 
questionnaire on perceived parental rearing behaviors between 2006 and 2008 
(T1). Subsequently, after an average of 3.5 years, we assessed (a) risky 
decision-making during performance of the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART); (b) 
event-related brain potentials (ERPs) elicited by positive (gain) and negative 
feedback (loss) during the BART; and (c) self-reported substance use behavior 
(T2). Age-corrected regression analyses showed that parental rejection at T1 
accounted for a unique and significant proportion of the variance in risk-taking 
during the BART; the more adolescents perceived their parents as rejecting, the 
more risky decisions were made. Higher levels of perceived emotional warmth 
predicted increased P300 amplitudes in response to positive feedback at T2. 
Moreover, these larger P300 amplitudes (gain) significantly predicted risky 
decision-making during the BART. Parental rearing behaviors during childhood 
thus seem to be significant predictors of both behavioral and 
electrophysiological indices of risky decision-making in adolescence several 
years later. This is in keeping with the notion that environmental factors such 
as parental rearing are important in explaining adolescents' risk-taking 
propensities.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12026
PMID: 23587039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1194. Dev Sci. 2013 May;16(3):365-76. doi: 10.1111/desc.12038.

Two-year-old children interpret abstract, purely geometric maps.

Winkler-Rhoades N(1), Carey SC, Spelke ES.

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. nwinkler@mit.edu

In two experiments, 2.5-year-old children spontaneously used geometric 
information from 2D maps to locate objects in a 3D surface layout, without 
instruction or feedback. Children related maps to their corresponding layouts 
even though the maps differed from the layouts in size, mobility, orientation, 
dimensionality, and perspective, and even when they did not depict the target 
objects directly. Early in development, therefore, children are capable of 
noting the referential function of strikingly abstract visual representations.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12038
PMCID: PMC5580983
PMID: 23587036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1195. Dev Sci. 2013 Mar;16(2):260-268. doi: 10.1111/desc.12022. Epub 2013 Feb 7.

Generalist genes and cognitive abilities in Chinese twins.

Chow BW(1), Ho CS(2), Wong SW(3), Waye MMY(4), Bishop DVM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Social Studies, City University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong.
(2)Department of Psychology, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(3)Department of Psychological Studies, The Hong Kong Institute of Education, 
Hong Kong.
(4)School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong.
(5)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, UK.

This study considered how far nonverbal cognitive, language and reading 
abilities are affected by common genetic influences in a sample of 312 typically 
developing Chinese twin pairs aged from 3 to 11 years. Children were 
individually given tasks of Chinese word reading, receptive vocabulary, 
phonological memory, tone awareness, syllable and rhyme awareness, rapid 
automatized naming, morphological awareness and orthographic skills, and Raven's 
Colored Progressive Matrices. Factor analyses on the verbal tasks adjusted for 
age indicated two factors: Language as the first factor and Reading as the 
second factor. Univariate genetic analyses indicated that genetic influences 
were substantial for nonverbal cognitive ability and moderate for language and 
reading. Multivariate genetic analyses showed that nonverbal cognitive ability, 
language and reading were influenced by shared genetic origins, although there 
were specific genetic influences on verbal skills that were distinct from those 
on nonverbal cognitive ability. This study extends the Generalist Genes 
Hypothesis to Chinese language and reading skills, suggesting that the general 
effects of genes could be universal across languages.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12022
PMCID: PMC3757317
PMID: 23432835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1196. Dev Sci. 2013 Mar;16(2):249-259. doi: 10.1111/desc.12021. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Bidirectional influences between maternal parenting and children's peer 
problems: a longitudinal monozygotic twin difference study.

Yamagata S(1), Takahashi Y(2), Ozaki K(3), Fujisawa KK(4), Nonaka K(5), Ando 
J(4).

Author information:
(1)National Center for University Entrance Examinations, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Center for the Promotion of Excellence in Higher Education, Kyoto University, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Data Science, The Institute of Statistical Mathematics, Japan.
(4)Department of Education, Faculty of Letters, Keio University, Japan.
(5)Department of Human and Environmental Well-Being, Wako University, Japan.

This twin study examined the bidirectional relationship between maternal 
parenting behaviors and children's peer problems that were not confounded by 
genetic and family environmental factors. Mothers of 259 monozygotic twin pairs 
reported parenting behaviors and peer problems when twins were 42 and 48 months. 
Path analyses on monozygotic twin difference scores revealed that authoritative 
parenting (the presence of consistent discipline and lack of harsh parenting) 
and peer problems simultaneously influenced each other. Authoritative parenting 
reduced peer problems, and peer problems increased authoritative parenting. 
Neither consistent discipline nor harsh parenting alone was associated with peer 
problems. These results suggest that maternal authoritative parenting works 
protectively in regard to children's peer problems, and peer problems can evoke 
such effective parenting.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12021
PMID: 23432834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1197. Dev Sci. 2013 Mar;16(2):198-208. doi: 10.1111/desc.12016. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

East-West cultural differences in context-sensitivity are evident in early 
childhood.

Imada T(1), Carlson SM(2), Itakura S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Brunel University, UK.
(2)Institute of Child Development, University of Minnesota, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Kyoto University, Japan.

Accumulating evidence suggests that North Americans tend to focus on central 
objects whereas East Asians tend to pay more attention to contextual information 
in a visual scene. Although it is generally believed that such culturally 
divergent attention tendencies develop through socialization, existing evidence 
largely depends on adult samples. Moreover, no past research has investigated 
the relation between context-sensitivity and other domains of cognitive 
development. The present study examined children in the United States and Japan 
(N = 175, age 4-9 years) to investigate the developmental pattern in 
context-sensitivity and its relation to executive function. The study found that 
context-sensitivity increased with age across cultures. Nevertheless, Japanese 
children showed significantly greater context-sensitivity than American 
children. Also, context-sensitivity fully mediated the cultural difference in a 
set-shifting executive function task, which might help explain past findings 
that East Asian children outperformed their American counterparts on executive 
function.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12016
PMCID: PMC5877415
PMID: 23432830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1198. Dev Sci. 2013 Jan;16(1):56-66. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01188.x. Epub 2012 
Oct 10.

Deficits in volitional oculomotor control align with language status in autism 
spectrum disorders.

Kelly DJ(1), Walker R, Norbury CF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Royal Holloway, University of London, UK. 
david.kelly@rhul.ac.uk

Eye-tracking paradigms are increasingly used to investigate higher-level social 
and cognitive processing in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, the 
integrity of the oculomotor system within ASD is unclear, with contradictory 
reports of aberrant eye-movements on basic oculomotor tasks. The purpose of the 
current study was to determine whether reducing population heterogeneity and 
distinguishing neurocognitive phenotypes can clarify discrepancies in oculomotor 
behaviour evident in previous reports. Reflexive and volitional eye-movement 
control was assessed in 73 children aged 8-14 years from four distinct groups: 
Autism Language Normal (ALN), Autism Language Impaired (ALI), non-autistic 
Language Impaired (LI) and Typically Developing (TD). Eye-movement control was 
measured using pro- and antisaccade tasks and a novel 'search distracter' task 
to measure distractibility. Reflexive eye-movements were equivalent across 
groups, but deficits in volitional eye-movement control were found that aligned 
with language status, and were not specific to ASD. More than 80% of ALI and LI 
children presented error rates at least 1.5 SDs below the TD mean in an 
antisaccade task. In the search distracter task, 35.29% of ALI children and 
43.75% of LI children had error rates greater than 1.5 SDs compared with 17.64% 
of ALN children. A significant proportion of children with neurodevelopmental 
disorders involving language function have pronounced difficulties suppressing 
reflexive saccades and maintaining fixations in the presence of competing 
stimuli. We extend the putative link between ALI and LI populations to 
non-language tasks, and highlight the need to account for co-morbidity in 
understanding the ontogenesis of ASD.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01188.x
PMID: 23278927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1199. Dev Sci. 2013 Jan;16(1):13-23. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01180.x. Epub 2012 
Oct 3.

The COMT Val/Met polymorphism is associated with reading-related skills and 
consistent patterns of functional neural activation.

Landi N(1), Frost SJ, Mencl WE, Preston JL, Jacobsen LK, Lee M, Yrigollen C, 
Pugh KR, Grigorenko EL.

Author information:
(1)Yale Child Study Center, USA. Nicole.landi@yale.edu

In both children and adults there is large variability in reading skill, with 
approximately 5-10% of individuals characterized as having reading disability; 
these individuals struggle to learn to read despite adequate intelligence and 
opportunity. Although it is well established that a substantial portion of this 
variability is attributed to the genetic differences between individuals, 
specifics of the connections between reading and the genome are not understood. 
This article presents data that suggest that variation in the COMT gene, which 
has previously been associated with variation in higher-order cognition, is 
associated with reading and reading-related skills, at the level of both brain 
and behavior. In particular, we found that the COMT Val/Met polymorphism at 
rs4680, which results in the substitution of the ancestral Valine (Val) by 
Methionine (Met), was associated with better performance on a number of critical 
reading measures and with patterns of functional neural activation that have 
been linked to better readers. We argue that this polymorphism, known for its 
broad effects on cognition, may modulate (likely through frontal lobe function) 
reading skill.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01180.x
PMCID: PMC3655431
PMID: 23278923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1200. Dev Sci. 2012 Nov;15(6):885-94. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01186.x. Epub 2012 
Sep 7.

Phonotactic acquisition in healthy preterm infants.

Gonzalez-Gomez N(1), Nazzi T.

Author information:
(1)Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, France. 
nayeli.gonzalez@etu.parisdescartes.fr

Previous work has shown that preterm infants are at higher risk for 
cognitive/language delays than full-term infants. Recent studies, focusing on 
prosody (i.e. rhythm, intonation), have suggested that prosodic perception 
development in preterms is indexed by maturational rather than 
postnatal/listening age. However, because prosody is heard in-utero, and 
preterms thus lose significant amounts of prenatal prosodic experience, both 
their maturation level and their prosodic experience (listening age) are shorter 
than that of full-terms for the same postnatal age. This confound does not apply 
to the acquisition of phonetics/phonotactics (i.e. identity and order of 
consonants/vowels), given that consonant differences in particular are only 
perceived after birth, which could lead to a different developmental pattern. 
Accordingly, we explore the possibility that consonant-based phonotactic 
perception develops according to listening age. Healthy French-learning 
full-term and preterm infants were tested on the perception of consonant 
sequences in a behavioral paradigm. The pattern of development for full-term 
infants revealed that 7-month-olds look equally at labial-coronal (i.e. /pat/) 
compared to coronal-labial sequences (i.e. /tap/), but that 10-month-olds prefer 
the labial-coronal sequences that are more frequent in the French lexicon. 
Preterm 10-month-olds (having 10 months of phonetic listening experience but 7 
months of maturational age) behaved as full-term 10-month-olds. These results 
establish that preterm developmental timing for consonant-based phonotactic 
acquisition is based on listening age (experience with input). This questions 
the interpretation of previous results on prosodic acquisition in terms of 
maturational constraints, and raises the possibility that different constraints 
apply to the acquisition of different phonological subcomponents.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01186.x
PMID: 23106742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1201. Dev Sci. 2012 Nov;15(6):876-84. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01185.x. Epub 2012 
Sep 12.

Doing gesture promotes learning a mental transformation task better than seeing 
gesture.

Goldin-Meadow S(1), Levine SC, Zinchenko E, Yip TK, Hemani N, Factor L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. 
sgm@uchicago.edu

Performing action has been found to have a greater impact on learning than 
observing action. Here we ask whether a particular type of action - the gestures 
that accompany talk - affect learning in a comparable way. We gave 158 
6-year-old children instruction in a mental transformation task. Half the 
children were asked to produce a Move gesture relevant to the task; half were 
asked to produce a Point gesture. The children also observed the experimenter 
producing either a Move or Point gesture. Children who produced a Move gesture 
improved more than children who observed the Move gesture. Neither producing nor 
observing the Point gesture facilitated learning. Doing gesture promotes 
learning better than seeing gesture, as long as the gesture conveys information 
that could help solve the task.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01185.x
PMCID: PMC3490223
PMID: 23106741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1202. Dev Sci. 2012 Nov;15(6):840-53. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01182.x.

Chimpanzees and bonobos exhibit divergent spatial memory development.

Rosati AG(1), Hare B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolutionary Anthropology, Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, 
Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA. alexandra.rosati@duke.edu

Spatial cognition and memory are critical cognitive skills underlying foraging 
behaviors for all primates. While the emergence of these skills has been the 
focus of much research on human children, little is known about ontogenetic 
patterns shaping spatial cognition in other species. Comparative developmental 
studies of nonhuman apes can illuminate which aspects of human spatial 
development are shared with other primates, versus which aspects are unique to 
our lineage. Here we present three studies examining spatial memory development 
in our closest living relatives, chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and bonobos (P. 
paniscus). We first compared memory in a naturalistic foraging task where apes 
had to recall the location of resources hidden in a large outdoor enclosure with 
a variety of landmarks (Studies 1 and 2). We then compared older apes using a 
matched memory choice paradigm (Study 3). We found that chimpanzees exhibited 
more accurate spatial memory than bonobos across contexts, supporting 
predictions from these species' different feeding ecologies. Furthermore, 
chimpanzees - but not bonobos - showed developmental improvements in spatial 
memory, indicating that bonobos exhibit cognitive paedomorphism (delays in 
developmental timing) in their spatial abilities relative to chimpanzees. 
Together, these results indicate that the development of spatial memory may 
differ even between closely related species. Moreover, changes in the spatial 
domain can emerge during nonhuman ape ontogeny, much like some changes seen in 
human children.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01182.x
PMID: 23106738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1203. Dev Sci. 2012 Nov;15(6):812-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.1184.x.

Influence of bilingualism on memory generalization during infancy.

Brito N(1), Barr R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA. 
nhb3@georgetown.edu

Very few studies have examined the cognitive advantages of bilingualism during 
the first two years of development, and a majority of the studies examining 
bilingualism throughout the lifespan have focused on the relationship between 
multiple languages and cognitive control. Early experience with multiple 
language systems may influence domain-general processes, such as memory, that 
may increase a bilingual child's capacity for learning. In the current study, we 
found that bilingual, but not monolingual, infants were able to generalize 
across cues at 18 months. This is the first study to show a clear bilingual 
advantage in memory generalization, with more equal or balanced exposure to each 
language significantly predicting ability to generalize.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.1184.x
PMID: 23106735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1204. Dev Sci. 2012 Sep;15(5):697-713. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01173.x. Epub 
2012 Jul 28.

Phonological similarity and mutual exclusivity: on-line recognition of atypical 
pronunciations in 3--5-year-olds.

Creel SC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Science, University of California San Diego, La 
Jolla, CA 92093-0515, USA. creel@cogsci.ucsd.edu

Recent research has considered the phonological specificity of children's word 
representations, but few studies have examined the flexibility of those 
representations. Tolerating acoustic-phonetic deviations has been viewed as a 
negative in terms of discriminating minimally different word forms, but may be a 
positive in an increasingly multicultural society where children encounter 
speakers with variable accents. To explore children's on-line processing of 
accented speech, preschoolers heard atypically pronounced words (e. g. 'fesh', 
from fish) and selected pictures from a four-item display as eye movements were 
tracked. Children recognized similarity between typical and accented variants, 
selecting the fish overwhelmingly when hearing 'fesh' (Experiment 1), even when 
a novel-picture alternative was present (Experiment 2). However, eye movements 
indicated slowed on-line recognition of accented relative to typical variants. 
Novel-picture selections increased with feature distance from familiar forms, 
but were similarly sensitive to vowel, onset, and coda changes (Experiment 3). 
Implications for child accent processing and mutual exclusivity are discussed.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01173.x
PMID: 22925517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1205. Dev Sci. 2012 Sep;15(5):653-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01165.x. Epub 2012 
May 31.

Functional dissociation between perception and action is evident early in life.

Hadad BS(1), Avidan G, Ganel T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Israel. 
bhadad@univ.haifa.ac.il

The functional distinction between vision for perception and vision for action 
is well documented in the mature visual system. Ganel and colleagues recently 
provided direct evidence for this dissociation, showing that while visual 
processing for perception follows Weber's fundamental law of psychophysics, 
action violates this law. We tracked the developmental trajectory of this 
functional dissociation, asking whether the qualitatively different pattern 
observed in adults of adherence of perception but not of action to Weber's law 
would also be evident early in life. Children aged 5-8 and adults were asked to 
either estimate the size of discs (perception) or grasp discs (action) varying 
in diameter. Interestingly, variability of perceptual estimates increased as a 
function of object size in accord with Weber's law, while variability of 
grasping did not scale with object size, at all ages tested. This provides the 
first clear evidence for an early emergence of the dissociation between 
perception and action.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01165.x
PMID: 22925513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1206. Dev Sci. 2012 Sep;15(5):633-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01155.x. Epub 2012 
May 17.

Belief attribution in deaf and hearing infants.

Meristo M(1), Morgan G, Geraci A, Iozzi L, Hjelmquist E, Surian L, Siegal M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Gothenburg, Sweden. 
marek.meristo@psy.gu.se

Based on anticipatory looking and reactions to violations of expected events, 
infants have been credited with 'theory of mind' (ToM) knowledge that a person's 
search behaviour for an object will be guided by true or false beliefs about the 
object's location. However, little is known about the preconditions for looking 
patterns consistent with belief attribution in infants. In this study, we 
compared the performance of 17- to 26-month-olds on anticipatory looking in ToM 
tasks. The infants were either hearing or were deaf from hearing families and 
thus delayed in communicative experience gained from access to language and 
conversational input. Hearing infants significantly outperformed their deaf 
counterparts in anticipating the search actions of a cartoon character that held 
a false belief about a target-object location. By contrast, the performance of 
the two groups in a true belief condition did not differ significantly. These 
findings suggest for the first time that access to language and conversational 
input contributes to early ToM reasoning.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01155.x
PMID: 22925511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1207. Dev Sci. 2012 Jul;15(4):579-88. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01154.x.

Bayesian face recognition and perceptual narrowing in face-space.

Balas B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, North Dakota State University, Fargo, ND 58102, 
USA. bjbalas@gmail.com

During the first year of life, infants' face recognition abilities are subject 
to 'perceptual narrowing', the end result of which is that observers lose the 
ability to distinguish previously discriminable faces (e.g. other-race faces) 
from one another. Perceptual narrowing has been reported for faces of different 
species and different races, in developing humans and primates. Though the 
phenomenon is highly robust and replicable, there have been few efforts to model 
the emergence of perceptual narrowing as a function of the accumulation of 
experience with faces during infancy. The goal of the current study is to 
examine how perceptual narrowing might manifest as statistical estimation in 
'face-space', a geometric framework for describing face recognition that has 
been successfully applied to adult face perception. Here, I use a computer 
vision algorithm for Bayesian face recognition to study how the acquisition of 
experience in face-space and the presence of race categories affect performance 
for own and other-race faces. Perceptual narrowing follows from the 
establishment of distinct race categories, suggesting that the acquisition of 
category boundaries for race is a key computational mechanism in developing face 
expertise.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01154.x
PMCID: PMC3383810
PMID: 22709406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1208. Dev Sci. 2012 Jul;15(4):463-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.1144.x. Epub 2012 
Mar 29.

Rapid recognition at 10 months as a predictor of language development.

Junge C(1), Kooijman V, Hagoort P, Cutler A.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. 
caroline.junge@upcmail.nl

Infants' ability to recognize words in continuous speech is vital for building a 
vocabulary. We here examined the amount and type of exposure needed for 
10-month-olds to recognize words. Infants first heard a word, either embedded 
within an utterance or in isolation, then recognition was assessed by comparing 
event-related potentials to this word versus a word that they had not heard 
directly before. Although all 10-month-olds showed recognition responses to 
words first heard in isolation, not all infants showed such responses to words 
they had first heard within an utterance. Those that did succeed in the latter, 
harder, task, however, understood more words and utterances when re-tested at 12 
months, and understood more words and produced more words at 24 months, compared 
with those who had shown no such recognition response at 10 months. The ability 
to rapidly recognize the words in continuous utterances is clearly linked to 
future language development.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.1144.x
PMID: 22709396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1209. Dev Sci. 2012 May;15(3):359-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01138.x. Epub 2012 
Mar 1.

Building biases in infancy: the influence of race on face and voice emotion 
matching.

Vogel M(1), Monesson A, Scott LS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts Amherst, 413 Tobin Hall 
⁄ 135 Hicks Way, Amherst, MA 01003, USA.

Early in the first year of life infants exhibit equivalent performance 
distinguishing among people within their own race and within other races. 
However, with development and experience, their face recognition skills become 
tuned to groups of people they interact with the most. This developmental tuning 
is hypothesized to be the origin of adult face processing biases including the 
other-race bias. In adults the other-race bias has also been associated with 
impairments in facial emotion processing for other-race faces. The present 
investigation aimed to show perceptual narrowing for other-race faces during 
infancy and to determine whether the race of a face influences infants' ability 
to match emotional sounds with emotional facial expressions. Behavioral 
(visual-paired comparison; VPC) and electrophysiological (event-related 
potentials; ERPs) measures were recorded in 5-month-old and 9-month-old infants. 
Behaviorally, 5-month-olds distinguished faces within their own race and within 
another race, whereas 9-month-olds only distinguish faces within their own race. 
ERPs were recorded while an emotion sound (laughing or crying) was presented 
prior to viewing an image of a static African American or Caucasian face 
expressing either a happy or a sad emotion. Consistent with behavioral findings, 
ERPs revealed race-specific perceptual processing of faces and emotion/sound 
face congruency at 9 months but not 5 months of age. In addition, from 5 to 9 
months, the neural networks activated for sound/face congruency were found to 
shift from an anterior ERP component (Nc) related to attention to posterior ERP 
components (N290, P400) related to perception.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01138.x
PMID: 22490176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1210. Dev Sci. 2012 Mar;15(2):260-71. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01122.x. Epub 2011 
Dec 3.

Toward an electrocortical biomarker of cognition for newborn infants.

Isler JR(1), Tarullo AR, Grieve PG, Housman E, Kaku M, Stark RI, Fifer WP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA. 
jri2101@columbia.edu

The event-related potential (ERP) effect of mismatch negativity (MMN) was the 
first electrophysiological probe to evaluate cognitive processing (change 
detection) in newborn infants. Initial studies of MMN predicted clinical utility 
for this measure in identification of infants at risk for developmental 
cognitive deficits. These predictions have not been realized. We hypothesized 
that in sleeping newborn infants, measures derived from wavelet assessment of 
power in the MMN paradigm would be more robust markers of the brain's response 
to stimulus change than the ERP-derived MMN. Consistent with this premise, we 
found increased power in response to unpredictable and infrequent tones compared 
to frequent tones. These increases were present at multiple locations on the 
scalp over a range of latencies and frequencies and occurred even in the absence 
of an ERP-derived MMN. There were two predominant effects. First, theta band 
power was elevated at middle and late latencies (200 to 600 ms), suggesting that 
neocortical theta rhythms that subserve working memory in adults are present at 
birth. Second, late latency (500 ms) increased power to the unpredictable and 
infrequent tones was observed in the beta and gamma bands, suggesting that 
oscillations involved in adult cognition are also present in the neonate. These 
findings support the expectation that frequency dependent measures, such as 
wavelet power, will improve the prospects for a clinically useful test of 
cortical function early in the postnatal period.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01122.x
PMCID: PMC3292196
PMID: 22356181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1211. Dev Sci. 2012 Mar;15(2):233-49. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01119.x. Epub 2012 
Jan 5.

The etiology of variation in language skills changes with development: a 
longitudinal twin study of language from 2 to 12 years.

Hayiou-Thomas ME(1), Dale PS, Plomin R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of York, Heslington, York YO10 5DD, UK. 
m.hayiou-thomas@psych.york.ac.uk

The present study is the first long-term longitudinal examination of the 
etiology of individual differences in language from early childhood through to 
adolescence. We applied a multivariate latent factor genetic model to 
longitudinal data from the Twins Early Development Study in order to (a) compare 
the magnitude of genetic and environmental influences on language skills in 
early childhood (2, 3 and 4 years), middle childhood (7, 9 and 10 years), and 
early adolescence (12 years); and (b) determine to what extent the same genetic 
and environmental factors underlie variation in language skills at these three 
stages of language development. We found that while shared environmental 
influences appear to be dominant (latent factor c² = .74) in early language, 
with a smaller though significant role for genetic factors (latent factor a² = 
.24), the pattern is reversed by middle childhood such that genetic influences 
are substantially more important (latent factor a² = .57-.63 at 7, 9 and 10 
years and .47-.57 at 12 years) and shared environmental influences less so 
(latent factor c² = .31-.37 at 7, 9 and 10 years and .31-.32 at 12 years). The 
increase in the heritability of language skills between early and middle 
childhood appears to be due to new genetic factors that come into play at that 
transition. In contrast, genetic factors remain stable from middle childhood 
through to early adolescence, and account for the phenotypic continuity in 
language skills across these two stages.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01119.x
PMID: 22356179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1212. Dev Sci. 2012 Mar;15(2):212-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01118.x. Epub 2011 
Nov 23.

Mommy, speak clearly: induced hearing loss shapes vowel hyperarticulation.

Lam C(1), Kitamura C.

Author information:
(1)MARCS Auditory Laboratories, University of Western Sydney, Australia. 
c.lam@uws.edu.au

Talkers hyperarticulate vowels when communicating with listeners that require 
increased speech intelligibility. Vowel hyperarticulation is said to be 
motivated by knowledge of the listener's linguistic needs because it typically 
occurs in speech to infants, foreigners and hearing-impaired listeners, but not 
to non-verbal pets. However, the degree to which vowel hyperarticulation is 
determined by feedback from the listener is surprisingly less well understood. 
This study examines whether mothers' speech input is driven by knowledge of the 
infant's linguistic competence, or by the infant's feedback cues. Specifically, 
we manipulated (i) mothers' knowledge of whether they believed their infants 
could hear them or not, and (ii) the audibility of the speech signal available 
to the infant (full or partial audibility, or inaudible). Remarkably, vowel 
hyperarticulation was completely unaffected by mothers' knowledge; instead, 
there was a reduction in the degree of hyperarticulation such that vowels were 
hyperarticulated to the greatest extent in the full audibility condition, there 
was reduced hyperarticulation in the partially audible condition, and no 
hyperarticulation in the inaudible condition. Thus, while it might be considered 
adaptive to hyperarticulate speech to the hearing-impaired adult or infant, when 
these two factors (infant and hearing difficulty) are coupled, vowel 
hyperarticulation is sacrificed. Our results imply that infant feedback drives 
talker behavior and raise implications for intervention strategies used with 
carers of hearing-impaired infants.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01118.x
PMID: 22356177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1213. Dev Sci. 2012 Jan;15(1):113-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01098.x. Epub 2011 
Oct 28.

Eighteen- and 24-month-old infants correct others in anticipation of action 
mistakes.

Knudsen B(1), Liszkowski U.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Research Group Communication before Language, Max-Planck-Institute 
for Psycholinguistics, Wundtlaan 1, 6525 XD Nijmegen, The Netherlands. 
Birgit.Knudsen@mpi.nl

Much of human communication and collaboration is predicated on making 
predictions about others' actions. Humans frequently use predictions about 
others' action mistakes to correct others and spare them mistakes. Such 
anticipatory correcting reveals a social motivation for unsolicited helping. 
Cognitively, it requires forward inferences about others' actions through mental 
attributions of goal and reality representations. The current study shows that 
infants spontaneously intervene when an adult is mistaken about the location of 
an object she is about to retrieve. Infants pointed out a correct location for 
an adult before she was about to commit a mistake. Infants did not intervene in 
control conditions when the adult had witnessed the misplacement, or when she 
did not intend to retrieve the misplaced object. Results suggest that preverbal 
infants anticipate a person's mistaken action through mental attributions of 
both her goal and reality representations, and correct her proactively by 
spontaneously providing unsolicited information.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01098.x
PMID: 22251297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1214. Dev Sci. 2012 Jan;15(1):87-98. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01106.x. Epub 2011 
Nov 2.

I'll have what she's having: the impact of model characteristics on children's 
food choices.

Frazier BN(1), Gelman SA, Kaciroti N, Russell JW, Lumeng JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822, 
USA. brandy2@hawaii.edu

This research investigates children's use of social categories in their food 
selection. Across three studies, we presented preschoolers with sets of 
photographs that contrasted food-eating models with different characteristics, 
including model gender, race (Black, White), age (child or adult), and/or 
expression (acceptance or rejection of the food). Children were asked to pick 
between the photographs to choose which food they would like for snack. Results 
demonstrated that preschoolers prefer foods being eaten by models with positive 
over negative expressions, foods being eaten by child over adult models, and 
foods being eaten by child models of the same gender as themselves over models 
of the other gender. This work connects with previous research on children's 
understanding of social categories and also has important practical implications 
for how characteristics of a food-eating model can affect children's willingness 
to try new foods.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01106.x
PMCID: PMC3261590
PMID: 22251295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1215. Dev Sci. 2012 Jan;15(1):62-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01105.x. Epub 2011 
Nov 28.

Refining the understanding of inhibitory processes: how response prepotency is 
created and overcome.

Simpson A(1), Riggs KJ, Beck SR, Gorniak SL, Wu Y, Abbott D, Diamond A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Essex, UK.

Understanding (a) how responses become prepotent provides insights into when 
inhibition is needed in everyday life. Understanding (b) how response prepotency 
is overcome provides insights for helping children develop strategies for 
overcoming such tendencies. Concerning (a), on tasks such as the day-night 
Stroop-like task, is the difficulty with inhibiting saying the name of the 
stimulus due to the name being semantically related to the correct response or 
to its being a valid response on the task (i.e. a member of the response set) 
though incorrect for this stimulus? Experiment 1 (with 40 4-year-olds) suggests 
that prepotency is caused by membership in the response set and not semantic 
relation. Concerning (b), Diamond, Kirkham and Amso (2002) found that 
4-year-olds could succeed on the day-night task if the experimenter sang a ditty 
after showing the stimulus card, before the child was to respond. They concluded 
that it was because delaying children's responses gave them time to compute the 
correct answer. However, Experiment 2 (with 90 3-year-olds) suggests that such a 
delay helps because it gives the incorrect, prepotent response time to passively 
dissipate, not because of active computation during the delay.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01105.x
PMCID: PMC3405835
PMID: 22251293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1216. Dev Sci. 2012 Jan;15(1):25-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01094.x. Epub 2011 
Sep 29.

Does theory of mind performance differ in children with early-onset and 
regressive autism?

Matthews NL(1), Goldberg WA, Lukowski AF, Osann K, Abdullah MM, Ly AR, Thorsen 
K, Spence MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Social Behavior, University of California, 
Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

A deficit in theory of mind (ToM), or the ability to infer the mental states of 
others, has been implicated as one of the major characteristics of Autism 
Spectrum Disorder (ASD); however, little attention has been devoted to possible 
differences in ToM ability within ASD. The current study examined ToM 
performance in children with early-onset autism and regressive autism in 
comparison to typically developing children. Results indicated that children in 
the regressive autism group performed significantly better than the early-onset 
autism group on the non-verbal appearance-reality task. Additionally, Fisher's 
exact tests indicated a pattern of lowest scores in the early-onset group and 
highest scores in the typically developing group, whereas the regressive autism 
group tended to score in between the early-onset and typically developing 
groups. The apparent heterogeneity in ToM performance within ASD could account 
for the lack of universality in ToM ability found in previous studies.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01094.x
PMID: 22251289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1217. Dev Sci. 2012 Jan;15(1):12-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01093.x. Epub 2011 
Sep 29.

Social factors in the development of early executive functioning: a closer look 
at the caregiving environment.

Bernier A(1), Carlson SM, Deschênes M, Matte-Gagné C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Montreal, P.O. Box 6128 Downtown 
Station, Montreal, QC, H3C 3J7, Canada. annie.bernier@umontreal.ca

This study investigated prospective links between quality of the early 
caregiving environment and children's subsequent executive functioning (EF). 
Sixty-two families were met on five occasions, allowing for assessment of 
maternal interactive behavior, paternal interactive behavior, and child 
attachment security between 1 and 2 years of age, and child EF at 2 and 3 years. 
The results suggested that composite scores of parental behavior and child 
attachment were related to child performance on EF tasks entailing strong 
working memory and cognitive flexibility components (conflict-EF). In 
particular, child attachment security was related to conflict-EF performance at 
3 years above and beyond what was explained by a combination of all other social 
antecedents of child EF identified thus far: child verbal ability and prior EF, 
family SES, and parenting behavior. Attachment security may thus play a 
meaningful role in young children's development of executive control.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01093.x
PMID: 22251288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1218. Dev Sci. 2012 Jan;15(1):2-11. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01092.x. Epub 2011 
Nov 3.

Vowels in early words: an event-related potential study.

Mani N(1), Mills DL, Plunkett K.

Author information:
(1)Language Acquisition Junior Research Group, University of Goettingen, 
Germany. nmani@gwdg.de

Previous behavioural research suggests that infants possess phonologically 
detailed representations of the vowels and consonants in familiar words. These 
tasks examine infants' sensitivity to mispronunciations of a target label in the 
presence of a target and distracter image. Sensitivity to the mispronunciation 
may, therefore, be contaminated by the degree of mismatch between the distracter 
label and the heard mispronounced label. Event-related potential (ERP) studies 
allow investigation of infants' sensitivity to the relationship between a heard 
label (correct or mispronounced) and the referent alone using single picture 
trials. ERPs also provide information about the timing of lexico-phonological 
activation in infant word recognition. The current study examined 14-month-olds' 
sensitivity to vowel mispronunciations of familiar words using ERP data from 
single picture trials. Infants were presented with familiar images followed by a 
correct pronunciation of its label, a vowel mispronunciation or a phonologically 
unrelated non-word. The results support and extend previous behavioural findings 
that 14-month-olds are sensitive to mispronunciations of the vowels in familiar 
words using an ERP task. We suggest that the presence of pictorial context 
reinforces infants' sensitivity to mispronunciations of words, and that 
mispronunciation sensitivity may rely on infants accessing the cross-modal 
associations between word forms and their meanings.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01092.x
PMID: 22251287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1219. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):417-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00997.x.

Thinking outside the cortex: social motivation in the evolution and development 
of language.

Syal S(1), Finlay BL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. 
ss572@cornell.edu

Alteration of the organization of social and motivational neuroanatomical 
circuitry must have been an essential step in the evolution of human language. 
Development of vocal communication across species, particularly birdsong, and 
new research on the neural organization and evolution of social and motivational 
circuitry, together suggest that human language is the result of an obligatory 
link of a powerful cortico-striatal learning system, and subcortical 
socio-motivational circuitry.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00997.x
PMID: 22213910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1220. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):402-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00990.x.

Is auditory discrimination mature by middle childhood? A study using 
time-frequency analysis of mismatch responses from 7 years to adulthood.

Bishop DV(1), Hardiman MJ, Barry JG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 
dorothy.bishop@psy.ox.ac.uk

Behavioural and electrophysiological studies give differing impressions of when 
auditory discrimination is mature. Ability to discriminate frequency and speech 
contrasts reaches adult levels only around 12 years of age, yet an 
electrophysiological index of auditory discrimination, the mismatch negativity 
(MMN), is reported to be as large in children as in adults. Auditory ERPs were 
measured in 30 children (7 to 12 years), 23 teenagers (13 to 16 years) and 32 
adults (35 to 56 years) in an oddball paradigm with tone or syllable stimuli. 
For each stimulus type, a standard stimulus (1000 Hz tone or syllable [ba]) 
occurred on 70% of trials, and one of two deviants (1030 or 1200 Hz tone, or 
syllables [da] or [bi]) equiprobably on the remaining trials. For the 
traditional MMN interval of 100–250 ms post-onset, size of mismatch responses 
increased with age, whereas the opposite trend was seen for an interval from 300 
to 550 ms post-onset, corresponding to the late discriminative negativity (LDN). 
Time-frequency analysis of single trials revealed that the MMN resulted from 
phase-synchronization of oscillations in the theta (4–7 Hz) range, with greater 
synchronization in adults than children. Furthermore, the amount of 
synchronization was significantly correlated with frequency discrimination 
threshold. These results show that neurophysiological processes underlying 
auditory discrimination continue to develop through childhood and adolescence. 
Previous reports of adult-like MMN amplitudes in children may be artefactual 
results of using peak measurements when comparing groups that differ in 
variance.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00990.x
PMCID: PMC3083517
PMID: 22213909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1221. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):280-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00976.x.

Subitizing and counting in typical and atypical development.

Schleifer P(1), Landerl K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.

Enumeration performance in standard dot counting paradigms was investigated for 
different age groups with typical and atypically poor development of arithmetic 
skills. Experiment 1 showed a high correspondence between response times and 
saccadic frequencies for four age groups with typical development. Age 
differences were more marked for the counting than the subitizing range. In 
Experiment 2 we found a discontinuity between subitizing and counting for 
dyscalculic children; however, their subitizing slopes were steeper than those 
of typically developing control groups, indicating a dysfunctional subitizing 
mechanism. Across both experiments a number of factors could be identified that 
affect enumeration in the subitizing and the counting range differentially. 
These differential patterns further support the assumption of two qualitatively 
different enumeration processes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00976.x
PMID: 22213901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1222. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):270-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00972.x.

Inhibitory control interacts with core knowledge in toddlers’ manual search for 
an occluded object.

Baker ST(1), Gjersoe NL, Sibielska-Woch K, Leslie AM, Hood BM.

Author information:
(1)Bristol Cognitive Development Centre, Department of Experimental Psychology, 
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. s.baker@bristol.ac.uk

Core knowledge theories advocate the primacy of fundamental principles that 
constrain cognitive development from early infancy. However, there is concern 
that core knowledge of object properties does not constrain older preschoolers’ 
reasoning during manual search. Here we address in detail both failure and 
success on two well-established search measures that require reasoning about 
solidity. We show that poor performance arises from an inability to engage the 
appropriate search strategy rather than a simple failure of core knowledge. 
Moreover, we demonstrate that successful search is positively correlated with 
inhibitory control. We believe that toddlers’ manual search for an occluded 
object reflects a general capacity to deploy inhibition so that search behaviour 
can be guided by core knowledge.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00972.x
PMID: 22213900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1223. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):256-69. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00974.x.

Speed of processing, anticipation, inhibition and working memory in bilinguals.

Bonifacci P(1), Giombini L, Bellocchi S, Contento S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. 
paola.bonifacci@unibo.it

Literature on the so-called bilingual advantage is directed towards the 
investigation of whether the mastering of two languages fosters cognitive skills 
in the non-verbal domain. The present study aimed to evaluate whether the 
bilingual advantage in non-verbal skills could be best defined as domain-general 
or domain-specific, and, in the latter case, at identifying the basic cognitive 
skills involved. Bilingual and monolingual participants were divided into two 
different age groups (children, youths) and were tested on a battery of 
elementary cognitive tasks which included a choice reaction time task, a 
go/no-go task, two working memory tasks (numbers and symbols) and an 
anticipation task. Bilingual and monolingual children did not differ from each 
other except for the anticipation task, where bilinguals were found to be faster 
and more accurate than monolinguals. These findings suggest that anticipation, 
which has received little attention to date, is an important cognitive domain 
which needs to be evaluated to a greater extent both in bilingual and 
monolingual participants.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00974.x
PMID: 22213899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1224. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):249-55. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00975.x.

Twelve-month-olds privilege words over other linguistic sounds in an associative 
learning task.

MacKenzie H(1), Graham SA, Curtin S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.

We examined whether 12-month-old infants privilege words over other linguistic 
stimuli in an associative learning task. Sixty-four infants were presented with 
sets of either word–object, communicative sound–object, or consonantal 
sound–object pairings until they habituated. They were then tested on a ‘switch’ 
in the sound to determine whether they were able to associate the word and/or 
sound with the novel objects. Infants associated words, but not communicative 
sounds or consonantal sounds, with novel objects. The results demonstrate that 
infants exhibit a preference for words over other linguistic stimuli in an 
associative word learning task. This suggests that by 12 months of age, infants 
have developed knowledge about the nature of an appropriate sound form for an 
object label and will privilege this form as an object label.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00975.x
PMID: 22213898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1225. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):214-23. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00970.x.

Onset and maturation of fetal heart rate response to the mother’s voice over 
late gestation.

Kisilevsky BS(1), Hains SM.

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing, Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, University 
&Kingston General Hospital, Kingston, ON, Canada. kisilevb@queensu.ca

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):224-5; discussion 226.

BACKGROUND: Term fetuses discriminate their mother’s voice from a female 
stranger’s, suggesting recognition/learning of some property of her voice. 
Identification of the onset and maturation of the response would increase our 
understanding of the influence of environmental sounds on the development of 
sensory abilities and identify the period when speech and language might 
influence auditory processing.
AIM: To characterize the onset and maturation of fetal heart rate response to 
the mother’s voice.
METHODS: 143 fetuses from 29 to 40 weeks gestational age (GA) received a 
standardized protocol: no-sound pre-voice baseline (2 min), audio recording of 
their mother reading a story (2 min), no-sound post-voice (2 min). The voice was 
delivered 10 cm above the maternal abdomen at an average of 95 dB A; heart rate 
was recorded continuously.
RESULTS: For data analyses, fetuses were categorized into four age groups: 
29–31, 32–34, 35–37, and > 37 weeks GA. Onset of response to the mother’s voice 
occurred at 32–34 weeks GA. From 32 to 37 weeks GA, there was an initial heart 
rate decrease followed by an increase. At term, there was a response shift to an 
initial heart rate increase. The percentage of fetuses responding increased over 
gestation from 46% at 32–34 weeks GA to 83% at term.
CONCLUSION: A relatively long latency and sustained duration of the heart rate 
response suggest auditory processing, the formation of neural networks, above 
the level of the brainstem.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00970.x
PMID: 22213896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1226. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):205-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00966.x.

Multisensory information boosts numerical matching abilities in young children.

Jordan KE(1), Baker J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Utah State University, Logan, UT 84322-2810, USA. 
kerry.jordan@usu.edu

This study presents the first evidence that preschool children perform more 
accurately in a numerical matching task when given multisensory rather than 
unisensory information about number. Three- to 5-year-old children learned to 
play a numerical matching game on a touchscreen computer, which asked them to 
match a sample numerosity with a numerically equivalent choice numerosity. 
Samples consisted of a series of visual squares on some trials, a series of 
auditory tones on other trials, and synchronized squares and tones on still 
other trials. Children performed at chance on this matching task when provided 
with either type of unisensory sample, but improved significantly when provided 
with multisensory samples. There was no speed–accuracy tradeoff between 
unisensory and multisensory trial types. Thus, these findings suggest that 
intersensory redundancy may improve young children’s abilities to match 
numerosities.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00966.x
PMID: 22213895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1227. Dev Sci. 2011 Nov;14(6):1471-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01114.x.

Is the child 'father of the man'? evaluating the stability of genetic influences 
across development.

Ronald A(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Department of Psychological 
Sciences, Birkbeck, UK. a.ronald@bbk.ac.uk

This selective review considers findings in genetic research that have shed 
light on how genes operate across development. We will address the question of 
whether the child is 'father of the Man' from a genetic perspective. In other 
words, do the same genetic influences affect the same traits across development? 
Using a 'taster menu' approach and prioritizing newer findings on cognitive and 
behavioral traits, examples from the following genetic disciplines will be 
discussed: (a) developmental quantitative genetics (such as longitudinal twin 
studies), (b) neurodevelopmental genetic syndromes with known genetic causes 
(such as Williams syndrome), (c) developmental candidate gene studies (such as 
those that link infant and adult populations), (d) developmental genome-wide 
association studies (GWAS), and (e) DNA resequencing. Evidence presented here 
suggests that there is considerable genetic stability of cognitive and 
behavioral traits across development, but there is also evidence for genetic 
change. Quantitative genetic studies have a long history of assessing genetic 
continuity and change across development. It is now time for the newer, more 
technology-enabled fields such as GWAS and DNA resequencing also to take on 
board the dynamic nature of human behavior.

2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01114.x
PMID: 22010904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1228. Dev Sci. 2011 Nov;14(6):1406-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01085.x. Epub 
2011 Aug 30.

Monkeys represent others' knowledge but not their beliefs.

Marticorena DC(1), Ruiz AM, Mukerji C, Goddu A, Santos LR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

The capacity to reason about the false beliefs of others is classically 
considered the benchmark for a fully fledged understanding of the mental lives 
of others. Although much is known about the developmental origins of our 
understanding of others' beliefs, we still know much less about the evolutionary 
origins of this capacity. Here, we examine whether non-human primates - 
specifically, rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) - share this developmental 
achievement. We presented macaques with a looking-time measure of false belief 
understanding, one that had recently been developed for use with 15-month-old 
human infants. Like human infants, monkeys look longer when a human experimenter 
fails to search in the correct location when she has accurate knowledge. In 
contrast to infants, however, monkeys appear to make no prediction about how a 
human experimenter will act when she has a false belief. Across three studies, 
macaques' pattern of results is consistent with the view that monkeys can 
represent the knowledge and ignorance of others, but not their beliefs. The 
capacity to represent beliefs may therefore be a unique hallmark of human 
cognition.

2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01085.x
PMCID: PMC3970702
PMID: 22010899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1229. Dev Sci. 2011 Nov;14(6):1393-405. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01082.x. Epub 
2011 Aug 29.

A comparison of temperament in nonhuman apes and human infants.

Herrmann E(1), Hare B, Cissewski J, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany. 
eherrman@eva.mpg.de

The adaptive behavior of primates, including humans, is often mediated by 
temperament. Human behavior likely differs from that of other primates in part 
due to temperament. In the current study we compared the reaction of bonobos, 
chimpanzees, orangutans, and 2.5-year-old human infants to novel objects and 
people - as a measure of their shyness-boldness, a key temperamental trait. 
Human children at the age of 2.5 years avoided novelty of all kinds far more 
than the other ape species. This response was most similar to that seen in 
bonobos and least like that of chimpanzees and orangutans. This comparison 
represents a first step in characterizing the temperamental profiles of species 
in the hominoid clade, and these findings are consistent with the hypothesis 
that human temperament has evolved since our lineage diverged from the other 
apes in ways that likely have broad effects on behavior. These findings also 
provide new insights into how species differences in ecology may shape 
differences in temperament.

2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01082.x
PMID: 22010898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1230. Dev Sci. 2011 Nov;14(6):1330-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01078.x. Epub 2011 
Sep 9.

Long trajectory for the development of sensitivity to global and biological 
motion.

Hadad BS(1), Maurer D, Lewis TL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Israel. 
bhadad@univ.haifa.ac.il

We used a staircase procedure to test sensitivity to (1) global motion in 
random-dot kinematograms moving at 4° and 18° s(-1) and (2) biological motion. 
Thresholds were defined as (1) the minimum percentage of signal dots (i.e. the 
maximum percentage of noise dots) necessary for accurate discrimination of 
upward versus downward motion or (2) the maximum percentage of noise dots 
tolerated for accurate discrimination of biological from non-biological motion. 
Subjects were adults and children aged 6-8, 9-11, and 12-14 years (n = 20 per 
group). Contrary to earlier research, results revealed a similar, long 
developmental trajectory for sensitivity to global motion at both slower and 
faster speeds and for biological motion. Thresholds for all three tasks improved 
monotonically between 6 and 14 years of age, at which point they were 
adult-like. The results suggest that the extrastriate mechanisms that integrate 
local motion cues over time and space take many years to mature.

2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01078.x
PMID: 22010893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1231. Dev Sci. 2011 Nov;14(6):1323-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01079.x. Epub 2011 
Aug 2.

Isolated words enhance statistical language learning in infancy.

Lew-Williams C(1), Pelucchi B, Saffran JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
WI 53705-2280, USA. lewwilliams@wisc.edu

Infants are adept at tracking statistical regularities to identify word 
boundaries in pause-free speech. However, researchers have questioned the 
relevance of statistical learning mechanisms to language acquisition, since 
previous studies have used simplified artificial languages that ignore the 
variability of real language input. The experiments reported here embraced a key 
dimension of variability in infant-directed speech. English-learning infants 
(8-10 months) listened briefly to natural Italian speech that contained either 
fluent speech only or a combination of fluent speech and single-word utterances. 
Listening times revealed successful learning of the statistical properties of 
target words only when words appeared both in fluent speech and in isolation; 
brief exposure to fluent speech alone was not sufficient to facilitate detection 
of the words' statistical properties. This investigation suggests that 
statistical learning mechanisms actually benefit from variability in utterance 
length, and provides the first evidence that isolated words and longer 
utterances act in concert to support infant word segmentation.

2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01079.x
PMCID: PMC3280507
PMID: 22010892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1232. Dev Sci. 2011 Nov;14(6):1311-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01077.x. Epub 
2011 Aug 4.

Time perception and its relationship to memory in Autism Spectrum Conditions.

Maister L(1), Plaisted-Grant KC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge, UK. 
maister.lara@googlemail.com

Timing is essential for the development of cognitive skills known to be impaired 
in Autism Spectrum Conditions (ASC), such as social cognition and episodic 
memory abilities. Despite the proposal that timing impairments may underpin core 
features of ASC, few studies have examined temporal processing in ASC and they 
have produced conflicting results. The present study first addressed 
discrepancies between previous experiments before testing the assumption that 
timing impairments may underpin key aspects of autism, by relating differences 
in temporal processing in the ASC group to memory abilities. Errors in duration 
reproduction in high functioning children with ASC were observed for the 
shortest and longest duration tested. While the former was due to attentional 
factors, the latter was due to deficient timing related to atypical episodic 
memory processing. These findings suggest that temporal processing abilities 
play a key role in the poor development of both social cognition and episodic 
memory abilities associated with ASC.

2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01077.x
PMID: 22010891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1233. Dev Sci. 2011 Nov;14(6):1292-300. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01080.x. Epub 
2011 Aug 2.

Preschool acuity of the approximate number system correlates with school math 
ability.

Libertus ME(1), Feigenson L, Halberda J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, MD 
21218, USA. melissa.libertus@jhu.edu

Previous research shows a correlation between individual differences in people's 
school math abilities and the accuracy with which they rapidly and nonverbally 
approximate how many items are in a scene. This finding is surprising because 
the Approximate Number System (ANS) underlying numerical estimation is shared 
with infants and with non-human animals who never acquire formal mathematics. 
However, it remains unclear whether the link between individual differences in 
math ability and the ANS depends on formal mathematics instruction. Earlier 
studies demonstrating this link tested participants only after they had received 
many years of mathematics education, or assessed participants' ANS acuity using 
tasks that required additional symbolic or arithmetic processing similar to that 
required in standardized math tests. To ask whether the ANS and math ability are 
linked early in life, we measured the ANS acuity of 200 3- to 5-year-old 
children using a task that did not also require symbol use or arithmetic 
calculation. We also measured children's math ability and vocabulary size prior 
to the onset of formal math instruction. We found that children's ANS acuity 
correlated with their math ability, even when age and verbal skills were 
controlled for. These findings provide evidence for a relationship between the 
primitive sense of number and math ability starting early in life.

2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01080.x
PMCID: PMC3338171
PMID: 22010889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1234. Dev Sci. 2011 Nov;14(6):1255-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01042.x. Epub 
2011 Apr 28.

Evidence for a unitary goal concept in 12-month-old infants.

Biro S(1), Verschoor S, Coenen L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Leiden University, The Netherlands. 
sbiro@fsw.leidenuniv.nl

We investigated whether infants can transfer their goal attribution between 
situations that contain different types of information about the goal. We found 
that 12-month-olds who had attributed a goal based on the causal efficacy of a 
means-end action generated expectations about the actor's action in another 
scenario in which the actor could choose between alternative outcomes. This 
finding suggests that, by 12 months, infants possess a unitary concept of goal.

2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01042.x
PMID: 22010886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1235. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1235-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01074.x. Epub 
2011 Jul 27.

Object individuation in 3-day-old chicks: use of property and spatiotemporal 
information.

Fontanari L(1), Rugani R, Regolin L, Vallortigara G.

Author information:
(1)Center for Mind/Brain Sciences, University of Trento, Italy. 
laura.fontanari@unitn.it

Object individuation was investigated in newborn domestic chicks. Chicks' 
spontaneous tendency to approach the larger group of familiar objects was 
exploited in a series of five experiments. In the first experiment newborn 
chicks were reared for 3 days with objects differing in either colour, shape or 
size. At test, each chick was presented with two groups of events: two objects 
differing in one property vs. two presentations of the same object. In both 
cases, all objects involved in the same group of events were sequentially 
presented and eventually concealed in a different spatial location, and the 
number of events taking place at each location was equalized. Chicks 
spontaneously approached the two different objects rather than the single object 
seen twice. Chicks did not just prefer the more varied set as they did not 
choose it when the two elements of each group of events were simultaneously 
presented (Experiment 2). Chicks succeeded when two different objects 
simultaneously presented were confronted with three identical ones 
simultaneously presented (Experiment 3), though they failed with sequential 
presentation of two different objects vs. one object presented three times if 
they had been familiarized with up to three identical objects (Experiment 4). 
Chicks instead succeeded if they had been familiarized with objects that were 
all different from one another (Experiment 5). These young birds thus proved 
able to use property and spatiotemporal information for object individuation.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01074.x
PMID: 21884338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1236. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1059-65. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01047.x. Epub 
2011 Jun 4.

The association between infants' self-regulatory behavior and MAOA gene 
polymorphism.

Zhang M(1), Chen X, Way N, Yoshikawa H, Deng H, Ke X, Yu W, Chen P, He C, Chi X, 
Lu Z.

Author information:
(1)School of Education, Linyi University, China.

Self-regulatory behavior in early childhood is an important characteristic that 
has considerable implications for the development of adaptive and maladaptive 
functioning. The present study investigated the relations between a functional 
polymorphism in the upstream region of monoamine oxidase A gene (MAOA) and 
self-regulatory behavior in a sample of Chinese infants at 6 months of age. 
Self-regulation was assessed by observing infants' behavior of orienting visual 
attention away from a threatening event in the laboratory situation. The results 
indicated that regulatory behavior was associated with the functional MAOA gene 
polymorphism in girls, but not boys. Girls with 4/4 genotypes displayed 
significantly higher regulation than girls with 3/3 and 3/4 genotypes. The 
present study provided evidence for gender differences on the role of MAOA gene 
polymorphism in socioemotional functioning in the early years.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01047.x
PMID: 21884321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1237. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1021-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01050.x. Epub 
2011 Jun 4.

Some types of parent number talk count more than others: relations between 
parents' input and children's cardinal-number knowledge.

Gunderson EA(1), Levine SC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. 
lizgunderson@uchicago.edu

Before they enter preschool, children vary greatly in their numerical and 
mathematical knowledge, and this knowledge predicts their achievement throughout 
elementary school (e.g. Duncan et al., 2007; Ginsburg & Russell, 1981). 
Therefore, it is critical that we look to the home environment for parental 
inputs that may lead to these early variations. Recent work has shown that the 
amount of number talk that parents engage in with their children is robustly 
related to a critical aspect of mathematical development - cardinal-number 
knowledge (e.g. knowing that the word 'three' refers to sets of three entities; 
Levine, Suriyakham, Rowe, Huttenlocher & Gunderson, 2010). The present study 
characterizes the different types of number talk that parents produce and 
investigates which types are most predictive of children's later cardinal-number 
knowledge. We find that parents' number talk involving counting or labeling sets 
of present, visible objects is related to children's later cardinal-number 
knowledge, whereas other types of parent number talk are not. In addition, 
number talk that refers to large sets of present objects (i.e. sets of size 4 to 
10 that fall outside children's ability to track individual objects) is more 
robustly predictive of children's later cardinal-number knowledge than talk 
about smaller sets. The relation between parents' number talk about large sets 
of present objects and children's cardinal-number knowledge remains significant 
even when controlling for factors such as parents' socioeconomic status and 
other measures of parents' number and non-number talk.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01050.x
PMCID: PMC3177161
PMID: 21884318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1238. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1012-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01048.x. Epub 
2011 Jun 4.

The developmental roots of fairness: infants' reactions to equal and unequal 
distributions of resources.

Geraci A(1), Surian L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Sciences, University of Trento, Italy.

The problem of how to distribute available resources among members of a group is 
a central aspect of social life. Adults react negatively to inequitable 
distributions and several studies have reported negative reactions to inequity 
also in non-human primates and dogs. We report two experiments on infants' 
reactions to equal and unequal distributions. In two experiments, infants' 
looking times and manual choices provide, for the first time, converging 
evidence suggesting that infants aged 12 to 18 months (mean age 16 months) 
attend to the outcomes of distributive actions to evaluate agents' actions and 
to reason about agents' dispositions. The results provide support for recent 
theoretical proposals on the developmental roots of social evaluation skills and 
a sense of fairness.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01048.x
PMID: 21884317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1239. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):989-1001. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01055.x. Epub 
2011 Apr 25.

How does a child solve 7 + 8? Decoding brain activity patterns associated with 
counting and retrieval strategies.

Cho S(1), Ryali S, Geary DC, Menon V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA 94305-5719, USA.

Cognitive development and learning are characterized by diminished reliance on 
effortful procedures and increased use of memory-based problem solving. Here we 
identify the neural correlates of this strategy shift in 7-9-year-old children 
at an important developmental period for arithmetic skill acquisition. 
Univariate and multivariate approaches were used to contrast brain responses 
between two groups of children who relied primarily on either retrieval or 
procedural counting strategies. Children who used retrieval strategies showed 
greater responses in the left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex; notably, this was 
the only brain region which showed univariate differences in signal intensity 
between the two groups. In contrast, multivariate analysis revealed distinct 
multivoxel activity patterns in bilateral hippocampus, posterior parietal cortex 
and left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex regions between the two groups. These 
results demonstrate that retrieval and counting strategies during early learning 
are characterized by distinct patterns of activity in a distributed network of 
brain regions involved in arithmetic problem solving and controlled retrieval of 
arithmetic facts. Our findings suggest that the reorganization and refinement of 
neural activity patterns in multiple brain regions plays a dominant role in the 
transition to memory-based arithmetic problem solving. Our findings further 
demonstrate how multivariate approaches can provide novel insights into 
fine-scale developmental changes in the brain. More generally, our study 
illustrates how brain imaging and developmental research can be integrated to 
investigate fundamental aspects of neurocognitive development.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01055.x
PMCID: PMC3193275
PMID: 21884315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1240. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):960-71. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01045.x. Epub 2011 
Apr 28.

The dynamics of development on the Dimensional Change Card Sorting task.

van Bers BM(1), Visser I, van Schijndel TJ, Mandell DJ, Raijmakers ME.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
b.m.c.w.vanbers@uva.nl

A widely used paradigm to study cognitive flexibility in preschoolers is the 
Dimensional Change Card Sorting (DCCS) task. The developmental dynamics of DCCS 
performance was studied in a cross-sectional design (N = 93, 3 to 5 years of 
age) using a computerized version of the standard DCCS task. A model-based 
analysis of the data showed that development on the DCCS task is best described 
as a discontinuous change in performance on the post-switch phase of the task. 
In addition to a perseveration group and a switch group, a transitional group 
that showed shifts between perseverating and switching during the post-switch 
trials could be distinguished. Computational models of performance and 
development on the DCCS task cannot, in their current forms, explain these 
results. We discuss how a catastrophe model of the developmental changes in task 
performance could be used to generate specific hypotheses about the variables 
that control development of DCCS performance.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01045.x
PMID: 21884312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1241. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):925-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01049.x. Epub 2011 
Apr 14.

Toddlers use speech disfluencies to predict speakers' referential intentions.

Kidd C(1), White KS, Aslin RN.

Author information:
(1)Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester, USA. 
ckidd@bcs.rochester.edu

The ability to infer the referential intentions of speakers is a crucial part of 
learning a language. Previous research has uncovered various contextual and 
social cues that children may use to do this. Here we provide the first evidence 
that children also use speech disfluencies to infer speaker intention. 
Disfluencies (e.g. filled pauses 'uh' and 'um') occur in predictable locations, 
such as before infrequent or discourse-new words. We conducted an eye-tracking 
study to investigate whether young children can make use of this distributional 
information in order to predict a speaker's intended referent. Our results 
reveal that young children (ages 2;4 to 2;8) reliably attend to speech 
disfluencies early in lexical development and are able to use disfluencies in 
online comprehension to infer speaker intention in advance of object labeling. 
Our results from two groups of younger children (ages 1;8 to 2;2 and 1;4 to 1;8) 
suggest that this ability emerges around age 2.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01049.x
PMCID: PMC3134150
PMID: 21676111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1242. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):873-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01037.x. Epub 2011 
Apr 4.

Electrophysiological evidence for the magnocellular-dorsal pathway deficit in 
dyslexia.

Jednoróg K(1), Marchewka A, Tacikowski P, Heim S, Grabowska A.

Author information:
(1)Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, Department of Neurophysiology, 
Warsaw, Poland. k.jednorog@nencki.gov.pl

In adults, the onset of coherent motion compared to random motion in a random 
dot kinematogram leads to a right hemispheric amplitude advantage of the N2 
response. The source of this asymmetry is believed to lie in the motion 
selective MT+ cortex. Here, we tested whether the right tempo-parietal N2 
component shows a similar regularity in children. In particular, we were 
interested in whether coherent vs. incoherent motion modulates the amplitude of 
N2 similarly in dyslexic and control children. We found higher N2 amplitude for 
coherent compared to random motion in the right hemisphere for controls but not 
for dyslexics. This effect was related to topographical differences of N2 
amplitude for random motion between the studied groups and was accompanied by 
longer reaction times to random motion in dyslexic compared to control children. 
Furthermore, a negative correlation between the amplitude of N2 for random 
motion and spelling errors was observed in both groups, which is consistent with 
previous findings linking the magnocellular-dorsal (MD) pathway with 
orthographic skills. These data support the hypothesis of subtle deficiencies in 
the MD pathway in dyslexia.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01037.x
PMID: 21676106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1243. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):859-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01034.x. Epub 2011 
Mar 24.

What's mine is mine: twelve-month-olds use possessive pronouns to identify 
referents.

Saylor MM(1), Ganea PA, Vázquez MD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Human Development, Vanderbilt University, USA. 
m.saylor@vanderbilt.edu

Erratum in
    Dev Sci. 2013 Mar;16(2):325.
    Dev Sci. 2013 Mar;16(2):325.

This research investigated 12-month-olds' ability to use person-specific 
language to determine to which of several absent things a person is referring. 
Infants were introduced to two experimenters who played separately with a 
different ball. One researcher asked infants to retrieve her object when both 
balls were hidden. Infants selected the correct object when researchers used the 
pronoun my, but failed to do so when the was used. The present research provides 
the first evidence of 12-month-olds' comprehension of possessive pronouns and 
indicates that infants use person-specific language to resolve reference.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01034.x
PMID: 21676104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1244. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):848-58. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01033.x. Epub 2011 
Mar 24.

Preschoolers joke with jokers, but correct foreigners.

Hoicka E(1), Akhtar N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Santa Cruz, USA. 
elena.hoicka@stir.ac.uk

Thirty- and 36-month-old English speakers' (N = 106) ability to produce jokes, 
distinguish between humorous and sincere intentions, and distinguish between 
English- and foreign-language speakers, was examined in two tasks. In the Giving 
task, an experimenter requested one of two familiar objects, and a confederate 
always gave her the wrong object. In the Naming task, the confederate mislabeled 
familiar objects. In the English-speaking conditions, the confederate laughed 
after doing the wrong thing (English-Humor) or said, 'There!' (English-Sincere). 
In the Foreign conditions, the French- or Italian-speaking confederate laughed 
(Foreign-Humor) or said, 'D'accord!' or 'Va bene!' (Foreign-Sincere). When 
preschoolers were subsequently requested to give and name the same objects and a 
new set of familiar objects they were significantly more likely to imitate and 
'do the wrong thing' in the Humor versus Sincere, and in the English versus 
Foreign conditions.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01033.x
PMID: 21676103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1245. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):822-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01030.x. Epub 2011 
Mar 24.

Evidence for motor planning in monkeys: rhesus macaques select efficient grips 
when transporting spoons.

Nelson EL(1), Berthier NE, Metevier CM, Novak MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts, USA. 
eliza_nelson@unc.edu

McCarty and colleagues (1999) developed the elevated spoon task to measure motor 
planning in human infants. In this task, a spoon containing food was placed on 
an elevated apparatus that supported both ends of the spoon. The handle was 
oriented to the left or right on different trials. We presented naïve adult 
rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) with the elevated spoon problem, and observed 
how monkeys learned the affordances of spoons over sessions. Strikingly, monkeys 
developed two different strategies for efficient spoon transport in just 12 to 
36 trials. In subsequent testing with a novel double bowl spoon approximately 1 
year later, monkeys demonstrated that they were attending to the baited spoon 
bowl and continued to select efficient grips for transporting the spoon. Monkey 
data were contrasted with previous studies in human infants using a 
perception-action perspective in an effort to understand the fundamentals of 
tool use and motor planning that may be common in the development of these 
abilities across species and their origins in human behavior.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01030.x
PMCID: PMC4059548
PMID: 21676101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1246. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):786-98. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01025.x. Epub 2010 
Dec 16.

Intonational phrase structure processing at different stages of syntax 
acquisition: ERP studies in 2-, 3-, and 6-year-old children.

Männel C(1), Friederici AD.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, 
Germany. maennel@cbs.mpg.de

This study explored the electrophysiology underlying intonational phrase 
processing at different stages of syntax acquisition. Developmental studies 
suggest that children's syntactic skills advance significantly between 2 and 3 
years of age. Here, children of three age groups were tested on phrase-level 
prosodic processing before and after this developmental phase, while their brain 
activity was recorded. The Closure Positive Shift (CPS), which indexes the 
perception of intonational phrasing in adults, served as dependent variable. The 
event-related brain potentials of 3- and 6-year-olds, but not of 21-month-olds, 
showed a CPS. These results suggest that prosodic phrase processing, as 
indicated by the CPS, is established only later during children's development, 
pointing to a close interaction of prosody and syntax acquisition.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01025.x
PMID: 21676098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1247. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):713-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01016.x. Epub 2010 
Dec 5.

Developmental differences in prefrontal activation during working memory 
maintenance and manipulation for different memory loads.

Jolles DD(1), Kleibeuker SW, Rombouts SA, Crone EA.

Author information:
(1)Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition (LIBC), Leiden University, The 
Netherlands. d.d.jolles@lumc.nl

The ability to keep information active in working memory is one of the 
cornerstones of cognitive development. Prior studies have demonstrated that 
regions which are important for working memory performance in adults, such as 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC), 
and superior parietal cortex, become increasingly engaged across school-aged 
development. The primary goal of the present functional MRI study was to 
investigate the involvement of these regions in the development of working 
memory manipulation relative to maintenance functions under different loads. We 
measured activation in DLPFC, VLPFC, and superior parietal cortex during the 
delay period of a verbal working memory task in 11-13-year-old children and 
young adults. We found evidence for age-related behavioral improvements in 
working memory and functional changes within DLPFC and VLPFC activation 
patterns. Although activation profiles of DLPFC and VLPFC were similar, group 
differences were most pronounced for right DLPFC. Consistent with prior studies, 
right DLPFC showed an interaction between age and condition (i.e. manipulation 
versus maintenance), specifically at the lower loads. This interaction was 
characterized by increased activation for manipulation relative to maintenance 
trials in adults compared to children. In contrast, we did not observe a 
significant age-dependent load sensitivity. These results suggest that 
age-related differences in the right DLPFC are specific to working memory 
manipulation and are not related to task difficulty and/or differences in 
short-term memory capacity.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01016.x
PMID: 21676092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1248. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):635-48. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01007.x. Epub 2010 
Dec 5.

Evidence for a specific cross-modal association deficit in dyslexia: an 
electrophysiological study of letter-speech sound processing.

Froyen D(1), Willems G, Blomert L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Faculty of Psychology and Neuroscience 
& Maastricht Brain Imaging Institute (M-BIC), Maastricht University, The 
Netherlands.

The phonological deficit theory of dyslexia assumes that degraded speech sound 
representations might hamper the acquisition of stable letter-speech sound 
associations necessary for learning to read. However, there is only scarce and 
mainly indirect evidence for this assumed letter-speech sound association 
problem. The present study aimed at clarifying the nature and the role of 
letter-speech sound association problems in dyslexia by analysing event-related 
potentials (ERP) of 11-year-old dyslexic children to speech sounds in isolation 
or combined with letters, which were presented either simultaneously with or 200 
ms before the speech sounds. Recent studies with normal readers revealed that 
letters systematically modulated speech sound processing in an early (mismatch 
negativity or MMN) and late (Late Discriminatory Negativity or LDN) time-window. 
The amplitude of the MMN and LDN to speech sounds was enhanced when speech 
sounds were presented with letters. The dyslexic readers in the present study, 
however, did not exhibit any early influences of letters on speech sounds even 
after 4 years of reading instruction, indicating no automatic integration of 
letters and speech sounds. Interestingly, they revealed a systematic late effect 
of letters on speech sound processing, probably reflecting the mere association 
of letters and speech sounds. This pattern is strongly divergent from that 
observed in age-matched normal readers, who showed both early and late effects, 
but reminiscent of that observed in beginner normal readers in a previous study 
(Froyen, Bonte, van Atteveldt & Blomert, 2009). The finding that the quality of 
letter-speech sound processing is directly related to reading fluency urges 
further research into the role of audiovisual integration in the development of 
reading failure in dyslexia.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01007.x
PMID: 21676085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1249. Dev Sci. 2011 May;14(3):566-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01004.x. Epub 2010 
Nov 23.

Neural coding of formant-exaggerated speech in the infant brain.

Zhang Y(1), Koerner T, Miller S, Grice-Patil Z, Svec A, Akbari D, Tusler L, 
Carney E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Speech-Language-Hearing Sciences, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. zhang470@umn.edu

Speech scientists have long proposed that formant exaggeration in 
infant-directed speech plays an important role in language acquisition. This 
event-related potential (ERP) study investigated neural coding of 
formant-exaggerated speech in 6-12-month-old infants. Two synthetic /i/ vowels 
were presented in alternating blocks to test the effects of formant 
exaggeration. ERP waveform analysis showed significantly enhanced N250 for 
formant exaggeration, which was more prominent in the right hemisphere than the 
left. Time-frequency analysis indicated increased neural synchronization for 
processing formant-exaggerated speech in the delta band at 
frontal-central-parietal electrode sites as well as in the theta band at 
frontal-central sites. Minimum norm estimates further revealed a bilateral 
temporal-parietal-frontal neural network in the infant brain sensitive to 
formant exaggeration. Collectively, these results provide the first evidence 
that formant expansion in infant-directed speech enhances neural activities for 
phonetic encoding and language learning.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01004.x
PMID: 21477195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1250. Dev Sci. 2011 May;14(3):540-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01001.x. Epub 2010 
Nov 11.

Evidence for syntactic alignment in children with autism.

Allen ML(1), Haywood S, Rajendran G, Branigan H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Lancaster University, UK. 
melissa.allen@lancaster.ac.uk

We report an experiment that examined whether children with Autistic Spectrum 
Disorder (ASD) spontaneously converge, or align, syntactic structure with a 
conversational partner. Children with ASD were more likely to produce a passive 
structure to describe a picture after hearing their interlocutor use a passive 
structure to describe an unrelated picture when playing a card game. 
Furthermore, they converged syntactic structure with their interlocutor to the 
same extent as did both chronological and verbal age-matched controls. These 
results suggest that the linguistic impairment that is characteristic of 
children with ASD, and in particular their difficulty with interactive language 
usage, cannot be explained in terms of a general deficit in linguistic 
imitation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01001.x
PMID: 21477193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1251. Dev Sci. 2011 May;14(3):530-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01000.x. Epub 2010 
Nov 29.

Young children attribute normativity to novel actions without pedagogy or 
normative language.

Schmidt MF(1), Rakoczy H, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Comparative Psychology, Max Planck Institute 
for Evolutionary Anthropology, Germany. marco_schmidt@eva.mpg.de

Young children interpret some acts performed by adults as normatively governed, 
that is, as capable of being performed either rightly or wrongly. In previous 
experiments, children have made this interpretation when adults introduced them 
to novel acts with normative language (e.g. 'this is the way it goes'), along 
with pedagogical cues signaling culturally important information, and with 
social-pragmatic marking that this action is a token of a familiar type. In the 
current experiment, we exposed children to novel actions with no normative 
language, and we systematically varied pedagogical and social-pragmatic cues in 
an attempt to identify which of them, if either, would lead children to 
normative interpretations. We found that young 3-year-old children inferred 
normativity without any normative language and without any pedagogical cues. The 
only cue they used was adult social-pragmatic marking of the action as familiar, 
as if it were a token of a well-known type (as opposed to performing it, as if 
inventing it on the spot). These results suggest that - in the absence of 
explicit normative language - young children interpret adult actions as 
normatively governed based mainly on the intentionality (perhaps signaling 
conventionality) with which they are performed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01000.x
PMID: 21477192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1252. Dev Sci. 2011 May;14(3):474-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00991.x. Epub 2010 
Sep 6.

Neural correlates of action observation and execution in 14-month-old infants: 
an event-related EEG desynchronization study.

Marshall PJ(1), Young T, Meltzoff AN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19087, USA. 
pjmarsh@temple.edu

There is increasing interest in neurobiological methods for investigating the 
shared representation of action perception and production in early development. 
We explored the extent and regional specificity of EEG desynchronization in the 
infant alpha frequency range (6-9 Hz) during action observation and execution in 
14-month-old infants. Desynchronization during execution was restricted to 
central electrode sites, while action observation was associated with a broader 
desynchronization across frontal, central, and parietal regions. The finding of 
regional specificity in the overlap between EEG responses to action execution 
and observation suggests that the rhythm seen in the 6-9 Hz range over central 
sites in infancy shares certain properties with the adult mu rhythm. The 
magnitude of EEG desynchronization to action perception and production appears 
to be smaller for infants than for adults and older children, suggesting 
developmental change in this measure.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00991.x
PMCID: PMC3106425
PMID: 21477187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1253. Dev Sci. 2011 Jan;14(1):112-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00969.x.

A longitudinal analysis of anger and inhibitory control in twins from 12 to 36 
months of age.

Gagne JR(1), Goldsmith HH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1202 West Johnson 
Street, Madison, WI 53706-1611, USA. jgagne@wisc.edu

Inhibitory control (IC) is a dimension of child temperament that involves the 
self-regulation of behavioral responses under some form of instruction or 
expectation. Although IC is posited to appear in toddlerhood, the voluntary 
control of emotions such as anger begins earlier. Little research has analyzed 
relations between emotional development in infancy and later emerging IC. We 
examined phenotypic associations and genetic and environmental influences on 
parent- and laboratory-assessed anger and IC in a twin sample from 12 to 36 
months of age. Typically, twins with low levels of IC had high levels of anger. 
Behavioral genetic findings confirmed significant genetic influences on anger 
and IC as assessed by parents, and on lab-based anger assessments. Shared 
environmental factors contributed to twin similarity on lab-assessed anger and 
IC at 36 months. Phenotypic covariance between anger and IC was largely due to 
overlapping genetic factors for parent ratings, and environmental factors in the 
laboratory.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00969.x
PMCID: PMC3049157
PMID: 21159093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1254. Dev Sci. 2011 Jan;14(1):92-105. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00961.x.

Imitation in infancy: the wealth of the stimulus.

Ray E(1), Heyes C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University College London, UK.

Imitation requires the imitator to solve the correspondence problem--to 
translate visual information from modelled action into matching motor output. It 
has been widely accepted for some 30 years that the correspondence problem is 
solved by a specialized, innate cognitive mechanism. This is the conclusion of a 
poverty of the stimulus argument, realized in the active intermodal matching 
model of imitation, which assumes that human neonates can imitate a range of 
body movements. An alternative, wealth of the stimulus argument, embodied in the 
associative sequence learning model of imitation, proposes that the 
correspondence problem is solved by sensorimotor learning, and that the 
experience necessary for this kind of learning is provided by the sociocultural 
environment during human development. In a detailed and wide-ranging review of 
research on imitation and imitation-relevant behaviour in infancy and beyond, we 
find substantially more evidence in favour of the wealth argument than of the 
poverty argument.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00961.x
PMID: 21159091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1255. Dev Sci. 2011 Jan;14(1):58-68. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00952.x.

Different social motives in the gestural communication of chimpanzees and human 
children.

Bullinger AF(1), Zimmermann F, Kaminski J, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Comparative Psychology, Max-Planck-Institute 
for Evolutionary Anthropology, Germany.

Both chimpanzees and human infants use the pointing gesture with human adults, 
but it is not clear if they are doing so for the same social motives. In two 
studies, we presented chimpanzees and human 25-month-olds with the opportunity 
to point for a hidden tool (in the presence of a non-functional distractor). In 
one condition it was clear that the tool would be used to retrieve a reward for 
the pointing subject (so the pointing was selfish or 'for-me'), whereas in the 
other condition it was clear that the tool would be used to retrieve the reward 
for the experimenter (so the pointing was helpful or 'for-you'). The chimpanzees 
pointed reliably only when they themselves benefited, whereas the human children 
pointed reliably no matter who benefited. These results are interpreted as 
evidence for the especially cooperative nature of human communication.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00952.x
PMID: 21159088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1256. Dev Sci. 2010 Nov;13(6):849-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00941.x.

Long-lasting memory for an odor acquired at the mother's breast.

Delaunay-El Allam M(1), Soussignan R, Patris B, Marlier L, Schaal B.

Author information:
(1)Equipe de Psychologie des Actions Langagières et Motrices, Université de 
Caen-Basse Normandie, Caen, France. maryse.delaunay-elallam@unicaen.fr

Whether neonatal odor memory can persist into toddlerhood and influence 
behaviors that tap processes related to cognition (attention and exploration), 
motivation (choice and consumption), and emotion (hedonic processing) remains 
under-researched. Using a quasi-experimental longitudinal design, we examined 
whether an odor experienced at the mother's breast can be retained at 7 and 21 
months. The prescribed prophylactic use of a camomile-scented balm defined two 
groups: infants exposed (CaE) or never exposed (CaNE) to camomile odor. At 7 
months, exploratory responses to three similar objects differing in odor 
(including camomile) were analyzed. At 21 months, three tasks were used to 
assess toddlers' (i) facial responses; (ii) exploratory responses to three 
similar, but differently odorized objects; and (iii) choices between two bottles 
carrying different odors. CaE infants displayed preferential responses for 
camomile odor at both ages in every task. In contrast, CaNE infants behaved 
either randomly or more negatively to camomile odor. This study indicates that 
early odor memories acquired during breastfeeding can be reactivated and 
influence behavioral processes until at least toddlerhood.

© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00941.x
PMID: 20977556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1257. Dev Sci. 2010 Sep 1;13(5):772-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00932.x.

'I bet you know more and are nicer too!': what children infer from others' 
accuracy.

Brosseau-Liard PE(1), Birch SA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, 2136 West Mall, 
Vancouver, Canada V6T 1Z4. patricia@psych.ubc.ca

Research has shown that preschoolers monitor others' prior accuracy and prefer 
to learn from individuals who have the best track record. We investigated the 
scope of preschoolers' attributions based on an individual's prior accuracy. 
Experiment 1 revealed that 5-year-olds (but not 4-year-olds) used an 
individual's prior accuracy at labelling to predict her knowledge of words and 
broader facts; they also showed a 'halo effect' predicting she would be more 
prosocial. Experiment 2 confirmed that, overall, 4-year-olds did not make 
explicit generalizations of knowledge. These findings suggest that an 
individual's prior accuracy influences older preschoolers' expectations of that 
individual's broader knowledge as well as their impressions of how she will 
behave in social interactions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00932.x
PMID: 20712743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1258. Dev Sci. 2010 Sep 1;13(5):731-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00928.x.

Increasing task difficulty enhances effects of intersensory redundancy: testing 
a new prediction of the Intersensory Redundancy Hypothesis.

Bahrick LE(1), Lickliter R, Castellanos I, Vaillant-Molina M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33199, 
USA.

Prior research has demonstrated intersensory facilitation for perception of 
amodal properties of events such as tempo and rhythm in early development, 
supporting predictions of the Intersensory Redundancy Hypothesis (IRH). 
Specifically, infants discriminate amodal properties in bimodal, redundant 
stimulation but not in unimodal, nonredundant stimulation in early development, 
whereas later in development infants can detect amodal properties in both 
redundant and nonredundant stimulation. The present study tested a new 
prediction of the IRH: that effects of intersensory redundancy on attention and 
perceptual processing are most apparent in tasks of high difficulty relative to 
the skills of the perceiver. We assessed whether by increasing task difficulty, 
older infants would revert to patterns of intersensory facilitation shown by 
younger infants. Results confirmed our prediction and demonstrated that in 
difficult tempo discrimination tasks, 5-month-olds perform like 3-month-olds, 
showing intersensory facilitation for tempo discrimination. In contrast, in 
tasks of low and moderate difficulty, 5-month-olds discriminate tempo changes in 
both redundant audiovisual and nonredundant unimodal visual stimulation. These 
findings indicate that intersensory facilitation is most apparent for tasks of 
relatively high difficulty and may therefore persist across the lifespan.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00928.x
PMCID: PMC2931424
PMID: 20712739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1259. Dev Sci. 2010 Sep 1;13(5):722-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00930.x.

Lexical and articulatory interactions in children's language production.

Heisler L(1), Goffman L, Younger B.

Author information:
(1)Speech, Language, & Hearing Sciences, Heavilon Hall, Purdue University, West 
Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.

Traditional models of adult language processing and production include two 
levels of representation: lexical and sublexical. The current study examines the 
influence of the inclusion of a lexical representation (i.e. a visual referent 
and/or object function) on the stability of articulation as well as on phonetic 
accuracy and variability in typically developing children and children with 
specific language impairment (SLI). A word learning paradigm was developed so 
that we could compare children's production with and without lexical 
representation. The variability and accuracy of productions were examined using 
speech kinematics as well as traditional phonetic accuracy measures. Results 
showed that phonetic forms with lexical representation were produced with more 
articulatory stability than phonetic forms without lexical representation. Using 
more traditional transcription measures, a paired lexical referent generally did 
not influence segmental accuracy (percent consonant correct and type token 
ratio). These results suggest that lexical and articulatory levels of 
representation are not completely independent. Implications for models of 
language production are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00930.x
PMCID: PMC2923745
PMID: 20712738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1260. Dev Sci. 2010 Jul;13(4):662-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00923.x.

Perceived quality of maternal care in childhood and structure and function of 
mothers' brain.

Kim P(1), Leckman JF, Mayes LC, Newman MA, Feldman R, Swain JE.

Author information:
(1)Yale Program for Risk, Resilience and Recovery, Child Study Center, Yale 
University School of Medicine, USA. Pilyoung.kim@nih.gov

Animal studies indicate that early maternal care has long-term effects on brain 
areas related to social attachment and parenting, whereas neglectful mothering 
is linked with heightened stress reactivity in the hippocampus across the 
lifespan. The present study explores the possibility, using magnetic resonance 
imaging, that perceived quality of maternal care in childhood is associated with 
brain structure and functional responses to salient infant stimuli among human 
mothers in the first postpartum month. Mothers who reported higher maternal care 
in childhood showed larger grey matter volumes in the superior and middle 
frontal gyri, orbital gyrus, superior temporal gyrus and fusiform gyrus. In 
response to infant cries, these mothers exhibited higher activations in the 
middle frontal gyrus, superior temporal gyrus and fusiform gyrus, whereas 
mothers reporting lower maternal care showed increased hippocampal activations. 
These findings suggest that maternal care in childhood may be associated with 
anatomy and functions in brain regions implicated in appropriate responsivity to 
infant stimuli in human mothers.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00923.x
PMCID: PMC3974609
PMID: 20590729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1261. Dev Sci. 2010 May;13(3):521-532. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00911.x.

Nonword repetition in children and adults: effects on movement coordination.

Sasisekaran J(1), Smith A(1), Sadagopan N(1), Weber-Fox C(1).

Author information:
(1) Department of Speech-Language-Hearing Sciences, University of Minnesota, 
USA Department of Speech, Language, Hearing Sciences, Purdue University, 
USA Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, University of 
Colorado, Boulder, USA.

Hearing and repeating novel phonetic sequences, or novel nonwords, is a task 
that taps many levels of processing, including auditory decoding, phonological 
processing, working memory, speech motor planning and execution. Investigations 
of nonword repetition abilities have been framed within models of 
psycholinguistic processing, while the motor aspects, which also are critical 
for task performance, have been largely ignored. We focused our investigation on 
both the behavioral and speech motor performance characteristics of this task as 
performed in a learning paradigm by 9- and 10-year-old children and young 
adults. Behavioral (percent correct productions) and kinematic (movement 
duration, lip aperture variability - an index of the consistency of 
inter-articulator coordination on repeated trials) measures were obtained in 
order to investigate the short-term (Day 1, first five vs. next five trials) and 
longer-term (Day 1 vs. Day 2, first five vs. next five trials) changes 
associated with practice within and between sessions. Overall, as expected, 
young adults showed higher levels of behavioral accuracy and greater levels of 
coordinative consistency than the children. Both groups, however, showed a 
learning effect, such that in general, later Day 1 trials and Day 2 trials were 
shorter in duration and more consistent in coordination patterns than Day 1 
early trials. Phonemic complexity of the nonwords had a profound effect on both 
the behavioral and speech motor aspects of performance. The children showed 
marked learning effects on all nonwords that they could produce accurately, 
while adults' performance improved only when challenged by the more complex 
nonword stimuli in the set. The findings point to a critical role for speech 
motor processes within models of nonword repetition and suggest that young 
adults, similar to children, show short- and longer-term improvements in 
coordinative consistency with repeated production of complex nonwords. There is 
also a clear developmental change in nonword production performance, such that 
less complex novel sequences elicit changes in speech motor performance in 
children, but not in adults.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00911.x
PMCID: PMC2867065
PMID: 20443972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1262. Dev Sci. 2010 Mar;13(2):363-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00906.x.

Two-year-olds are vigilant of others' non-verbal cues to credibility.

Birch SA(1), Akmal N, Frampton KL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. 
sbirch@psych.ubc.ca

Data from three experiments provide the first evidence that children, at least 
as young as age two, are vigilant of others' non-verbal cues to credibility, and 
flexibly use these cues to facilitate learning. Experiment 1 revealed that 2- 
and 3-year-olds prefer to learn about objects from someone who appears, through 
non-verbal cues, to be confident in performing actions on those objects than 
from someone who appears uncertain when performing actions on those objects. 
Experiment 2 revealed that when 2-year-olds observe only one model perform a 
single action, either confidently or unconfidently, they do not use the model's 
level of confidence in this single instance to influence their learning. 
Experiment 3 revealed that 2-year-olds will use a single model's level of 
confidence to guide their learning if they have observed that the model has a 
history of being either consistently confident or consistently uncertain. These 
findings reveal that young children selectively alter their learning based on 
others' non-verbal cues of credibility, and underscore the importance of an 
early sensitivity to socio-cognitive cues for human learning and development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00906.x
PMID: 20136933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1263. Dev Sci. 2010 Mar;13(2):355-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00889.x.

Age differences in the contribution of recollection and familiarity to 
false-memory formation: a new paradigm to examine developmental reversals.

Lyons KE(1), Ghetti S, Cornoldi C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Center for Mind and Brain, University of 
California, Davis, USA.

Using a new method for studying the development of false-memory formation, we 
examined developmental differences in the rates at which 6-, 7-, 9-, 10-, and 
18-year-olds made two types of memory errors: backward causal-inference errors 
(i.e. falsely remembering having viewed the non-viewed cause of a previously 
viewed effect), and gap-filling errors (i.e. falsely remembering having viewed a 
script-consistent event that was not actually witnessed). Previous research 
suggests that backward causal-inference errors are supported by recollection, 
whereas gap-filling errors are supported by familiarity. We hypothesized that 
age differences in these errors would parallel the developmental trajectories of 
these processes. As predicted, age-related increases in backward 
causal-inference errors were observed, while gap-filling errors were 
age-invariant, suggesting that recollection-based memory distortions increase 
with age while familiarity-based memory distortions are relatively stable from 
middle childhood through adulthood.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00889.x
PMID: 20136932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1264. Dev Sci. 2010 Mar;13(2):346-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00884.x.

Biological components of colour preference in infancy.

Franklin A(1), Bevis L, Ling Y, Hurlbert A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Surrey, Guildford. UK. 
a.franklin@surrey.ac.uk

Adult colour preference has been summarized quantitatively in terms of weights 
on the two fundamental neural processes that underlie early colour encoding: the 
S-(L+M) ('blue-yellow') and L-M ('red-green') cone-opponent contrast channels 
(Ling, Hurlbert & Robinson, 2006; Hurlbert & Ling, 2007). Here, we investigate 
whether colour preference in 4-5-month-olds may be analysed in the same way. We 
recorded infants' eye-movements in response to pairwise presentations of eight 
colour stimuli varying only in hue. Infants looked longest at reddish and 
shortest at greenish hues. Analyses revealed that the L-M and S-(L+M) contrast 
between stimulus colour and background explained around half of the variation in 
infant preference across the hue spectrum. Unlike adult colour preference 
patterns, there was no evidence for sex differences in the weights on either of 
the cone-opponent contrast components. The findings provide a quantitative model 
of infant colour preference that summarizes variation in infant preference 
across hues.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00884.x
PMID: 20136931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1265. Dev Sci. 2010 Mar;13(2):320-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00881.x.

Intuitions about gravity and solidity in great apes: the tubes task.

Cacchione T(1), Call J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Cognitive and Developmental Psychology, University 
of Zürich, Switzerland. t.cacchione@psychologie.uzh.ch

We investigated whether great apes, like human infants, monkeys and dogs, are 
subject to a strong gravity bias when tested with the tubes task, and--in case 
of mastery--what the source of competence on the tubes task is. We presented 22 
apes with three versions of the tubes task, in which an object is dropped down a 
tube connected to one of three potential hiding places and the subject is 
required to locate the object. In two versions, apes were confronted with a 
causal tube that varied in the amount of perceptual information it provided 
(i.e. presence or absence of acoustic cues). The third version was a non-causal 
adaptation of the task in which a painted line 'connected' dropping and hiding 
places. Results indicate that apes neither have a reliable gravity bias when 
tested with the tubes, nor understand the causal function of the tube. Even 
though there is evidence that they can integrate tube-related causal information 
to localize the object, they seem to depend mainly on non-causal inferences when 
searching for an invisibly displaced object.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00881.x
PMID: 20136928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1266. Dev Sci. 2010 Mar;13(2):298-306. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00880.x.

The development of spontaneous gender stereotyping in childhood: relations to 
stereotype knowledge and stereotype flexibility.

Banse R(1), Gawronski B, Rebetez C, Gutt H, Morton JB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Bonn, Germany. banse@uni-bonn.de

The development of spontaneous gender stereotyping in children was investigated 
using the newly developed Action Interference Paradigm (AIP). This task consists 
of assigning gender-stereotypical toys as quickly as possible to boys and girls 
in either a stereotype-congruent or a stereotype-incongruent manner. A pilot 
study with 38 children (mean age 5.1 years) provided evidence for spontaneous 
gender stereotyping in the AIP, which was reflected in higher latencies for 
stereotype-incongruent compared with stereotype-congruent toy assignments. The 
main study, with 66 children (aged 5, 8 and 11 years), compared the development 
of spontaneous stereotyping with established measures of stereotype flexibility 
and stereotype knowledge. Stereotype flexibility showed a strong increase from 
age 5 to 11. In contrast, stereotype knowledge and spontaneous stereotyping 
remained stable at high levels. The results provide evidence for a dissociation 
between stereotype flexibility and spontaneous stereotyping, suggesting that 
spontaneous stereotyping may be more closely related to stereotype knowledge 
than to stereotype flexibility.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00880.x
PMID: 20136926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1267. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):201-12. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00874.x.

The development of skin conductance fear conditioning in children from ages 3 to 
8 years.

Gao Y(1), Raine A, Venables PH, Dawson ME, Mednick SA.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Criminology, McNeil Building, Suite 483, University of 
Pennsylvania, 3718 Locust Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6286, USA. 
yugao@sas.upenn.edu

Although fear conditioning is an important psychological construct implicated in 
behavioral and emotional problems, little is known about how it develops in 
early childhood. Using a differential, partial reinforcement conditioning 
paradigm, this longitudinal study assessed skin conductance conditioned 
responses in 200 children at ages 3, 4, 5, 6, and 8 years. Results demonstrated 
that in both boys and girls: (1) fear conditioning increased across age, 
particularly from ages 5 to 6 years, (2) the three components of skin 
conductance fear conditioning that reflect different degrees of automatic and 
controlled cognitive processes exhibited different developmental profiles, and 
(3) individual differences in arousal, orienting, and the unconditioned response 
were associated with individual differences in conditioning, with the influence 
of orienting increasing at later ages. This first longitudinal study of the 
development of skin conductance fear conditioning in children both demonstrates 
that children as young as age 3 years evidence fear conditioning in a difficult 
acquisition paradigm, and that different sub-components of skin conductance 
conditioning have different developmental trajectories.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00874.x
PMCID: PMC2818004
PMID: 20121876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1268. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):161-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00875.x.

Evidence for intact memory-guided attention in school-aged children.

Dixon ML(1), Zelazo PD, De Rosa E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, 100 Saint George Street, 
Toronto, ON, Canada, M5S 3G3.

Visual scenes contain many statistical regularities such as the likely identity 
and location of objects that are present; with experience, such regularities can 
be encoded and can ultimately facilitate the deployment of spatial attention to 
important locations. Memory-guided attention has been extensively examined in 
adults with the 'contextual cueing' paradigm and has been linked to specific 
neural substrates - a medial temporal lobe (MTL)-frontoparietal network. 
However, it currently remains unknown when this ability comes 'online' during 
development. Thus, we examined the performance of school-aged children on an 
age-appropriate version of the contextual cueing paradigm. Children searched for 
a target fish among distractor fish in new displays and in 'old' displays on a 
touchscreen computer. Old displays repeated across blocks of trials and thus 
provided an opportunity for prior experience with the invariant configuration of 
the stimuli to guide attentional deployment. We found that over time children 
searched old displays significantly faster than new displays, thus revealing 
intact memory-guided attention and presumed function of an MTL-frontoparietal 
network in 5- to 9-year-olds. More generally, our findings suggest that children 
are remarkably sensitive to the inherent structure of their visual environment 
and this enables attentional deployment to become more efficient with 
experience.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00875.x
PMID: 20121872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1269. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):134-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00863.x.

Do you see what I see? Infants' reasoning about others' incomplete perceptions.

Luo Y(1), Beck W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 
65211, USA. luoy@missouri.edu

Twelve-month-olds realize that when an agent cannot see an object, her 
incomplete perceptions still guide her goal-directed actions. What would happen 
if the agent had incomplete perceptions because she could see only one part of 
the object, for example one side of a screen? In the present research, 
16-month-olds were first shown an agent who always pointed to a red object, as 
opposed to a black or a yellow object, suggesting that she preferred red over 
the other colours. Next, two screens were introduced while the agent was absent. 
The screens were (1) red or green on both sides; (2) red on the front (infants' 
side) but green on the back (the agent's side) or vice versa; or (3) only 
coloured red or green on the front. During test, the agent, who could see only 
the back of the screens, pointed to one of the two screens. The results revealed 
that while infants expected the agent to continue acting on her colour 
preference and point to the red rather than the green screen during test, they 
did so in accord with the agent's perception of the screens, rather than their 
own perceptions: they expected the agent to point to the red screen in (1), but 
to the green-front screen in (2), and they had no prediction of which screen the 
agent should point to in (3). The implications of the present findings for early 
psychological reasoning research are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00863.x
PMID: 20121869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1270. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):120-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00864.x.

Seven-year-olds allocate attention like adults unless working memory is 
overloaded.

Cowan N(1), Morey CC, AuBuchon AM, Zwilling CE, Gilchrist AL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Missouri, 217 McAlester 
Hall, Columbia, MO 65211, USA. CowanN@missouri.edu

Previous studies have indicated that visual working memory performance increases 
with age in childhood, but it is not clear why. One main hypothesis has been 
that younger children are less efficient in their attention; specifically, they 
are less able to exclude irrelevant items from working memory to make room for 
relevant items. We examined this hypothesis by measuring visual working memory 
capacity under a continuum of five attention conditions. A recognition advantage 
was found for items to be attended as opposed to ignored. The size of this 
attention-related effect was adult-like in young children with small arrays, 
suggesting that their attention processes are efficient even though their 
working memory capacity is smaller than that of older children and adults. With 
a larger working memory load, this efficiency in young children was compromised. 
The efficiency of attention cannot be the sole explanation for the capacity 
difference.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00864.x
PMCID: PMC2819460
PMID: 20121868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1271. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):62-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00860.x.

Children perseverate to a human's actions but not to a robot's actions.

Moriguchi Y(1), Kanda T, Ishiguro H, Itakura S.

Author information:
(1)Interfaculty Initiative in Information Studies, University of Tokyo, Japan. 
moriguchiy@ardbeg.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Previous research has shown that young children commit perseverative errors from 
their observation of another person's actions. The present study examined how 
social observation would lead children to perseverative tendencies, using a 
robot. In Experiment 1, preschoolers watched either a human model or a robot 
sorting cards according to one dimension (e.g. shape), after which they were 
asked to sort according to a different dimension (e.g. colour). The results 
showed that children's behaviours in the task were significantly influenced by 
the human model's actions but not by the robot's actions. Experiment 2 excluded 
the possibility that children's behaviours were not affected by the robot's 
actions because they did not observe its actions. We concluded that children's 
perseverative errors from social observation resulted, in part, from their 
socio-cognitive ability.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00860.x
PMID: 20121863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1272. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):37-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00859.x.

Children's and adults' judgments of equitable resource distributions.

McCrink K(1), Bloom P, Santos LR.

Author information:
(1)33 Kirkland Street, William James Hall, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 
02138, USA. mccrink@wjh.harvard.edu

This study explored the criteria that children and adults use when evaluating 
the niceness of a character who is distributing resources. Four- and 
five-year-olds played the 'Giving Game', in which two puppets with different 
amounts of chips each gave some portion of these chips to the children. Adults 
played an analogous task that mimicked the situations presented to children in 
the Giving Game. For all groups of participants, we manipulated the absolute 
amount and proportion of chips given away. We found that children and adults 
used different cues to establish which puppet was nicer: 4-year-olds focused 
exclusively on absolute amount, 5-year-olds showed some sensitivity to 
proportion, and adults focused exclusively on proportion. These results are 
discussed in light of their implications for equity theory and for theories of 
the development of social evaluation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00859.x
PMID: 20121861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1273. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):11-27. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00858.x.

Nonlinear epigenetic variance: review and simulations.

Kan KJ(1), Ploeger A, Raijmakers ME, Dolan CV, van der Maas HL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Roetersstraat 15, 1018 WB, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. k.j.kan@uva.nl

We present a review of empirical evidence that suggests that a substantial 
portion of phenotypic variance is due to nonlinear (epigenetic) processes during 
ontogenesis. The role of such processes as a source of phenotypic variance in 
human behaviour genetic studies is not fully appreciated. In addition to our 
review, we present simulation studies of nonlinear epigenetic variance using a 
computational model of neuronal network development. In each simulation study, 
time series for monozygotic and dizygotic twins were generated and analysed 
using conventional behaviour genetic modelling. In the results of these 
analyses, the nonlinear epigenetic variance was subsumed under the non-shared 
environmental component. As is commonly found in behaviour genetic studies, 
observed heritabilities and unique environmentabilities increased with time, 
whereas common environmentabilities decreased. The fact that the phenotypic 
effects of nonlinear epigenetic processes appear as unsystematic variance in 
conventional twin analyses complicates the identification and quantification of 
the ultimate genetic and environmental causes of individual differences. We 
believe that nonlinear dynamical system theories provide a challenging 
perspective on the development of individual differences, which may enrich 
behaviour genetic studies.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00858.x
PMID: 20121859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1274. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):1060-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00850.x.

Relationship between manual preferences for object manipulation and pointing 
gestures in infants and toddlers.

Vauclair J(1), Imbault J.

Author information:
(1)Center for Research in the Psychology of Cognition, Language & Emotion, 
Department of Psychology, Aix-Marseille University, Aix-en-Provence, France. 
Jacques.Vauclair@univ-provence.fr

The aim of this study was to measure the pattern of hand preferences for 
pointing gestures as a function of object-manipulation handedness in 123 infants 
and toddlers (10-40 months). The results showed that not only right-handers but 
also left-handers and ambidextrous participants tended to use their right hand 
for pointing. There was a significant correlation between manual preferences and 
pointing lateralization. Further analyses showed that the correlation between 
these two indexes was at its strongest during two key phases of language 
development (i.e. vocabulary spurt and syntax improvement) and weakened to 
become nonsignificant in the interim. These findings support the view that 
humans have a specialized area for communicative gestures and language in the 
left cerebral hemisphere that may be independent of the system controlling the 
purely motor functions of hand use.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00850.x
PMID: 19840060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1275. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):1054-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00857.x.

Developmental differences in memory for cross-modal associations.

Pirogovsky E(1), Murphy C, Gilbert PE.

Author information:
(1)University of California San Diego-San Diego State University, SDSU-UCSD 
Joint Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology, San Diego, CA 92120-4913, USA.

Associative learning is critical to normal cognitive development in children. 
However, young adults typically outperform children on paired-associate tasks 
involving visual, verbal and spatial location stimuli. The present experiment 
investigated cross-modal odour-place associative memory in children (7-10 years) 
and young adults (18-24 years). During the study phase, six odours were 
individually presented and paired with one of 12 spatial locations on a board. 
During the test phase, participants were presented with the six stimuli 
individually and were asked to place each stimulus on the correct spatial 
location. Children committed significantly more errors on the odour-place task 
than did young adults. However, item recognition memory for the odours or 
spatial locations involved in the odour-place associative memory task was 
similar between children and young adults. Therefore, poor odour-place 
associative memory in children did not result from impaired memory for the 
individual odours or spatial locations involved in the associations. The results 
suggest that cross-modal associative memory is not fully developed in children.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00857.x
PMID: 19840059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1276. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):991-1006. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00844.x.

Object permanence and method of disappearance: looking measures further 
contradict reaching measures.

Charles EP(1), Rivera SM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Pennsylvania State University, Altoona, PA 16601, 
USA. epc2@psu.edu

Piaget proposed that understanding permanency, understanding occlusion events, 
and forming mental representations were synonymous; however, accumulating 
evidence indicates that those concepts are not unified in development. Infants 
reach for endarkened objects at younger ages than for occluded objects, and 
infants' looking patterns suggest that they expect occluded objects to reappear 
at younger ages than they reach for them. We reaffirm the latter finding in 5- 
to 6-month-olds and find similar responses to faded objects, but we fail to find 
that pattern in response to endarkened objects. This suggests that looking 
behavior and reaching behavior are both sensitive to method of disappearance, 
but with opposite effects. Current cognition-oriented (i.e. 
representation-oriented) explanations of looking behavior cannot easily 
accommodate these results; neither can perceptual-preference explanations, nor 
the traditional ecological reinterpretations of object permanence. A revised 
ecological hypothesis, invoking affordance learning, suggests how these 
differences could arise developmentally.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00844.x
PMID: 19840053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1277. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):956-77. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00847.x.

Contribution of the priming paradigm to the understanding of the conceptual 
developmental shift from 5 to 9 years of age.

Perraudin S(1), Mounoud P.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, University of Geneva, 
Switzerland. Sandrine.Perraudin@pse.unige.ch

We conducted three experiments to study the role of instrumental (e.g. 
knife-bread) and categorical (e.g. cake-bread) relations in the development of 
conceptual organization with a priming paradigm, by varying the nature of the 
task (naming--Experiment 1--or categorical decision--Experiments 2 and 3). The 
participants were 5-, 7- and 9-year-old children and adults. The results showed 
that on both types of task, adults and 9-year-old children presented 
instrumental and categorical priming effects, whereas 5-year-old children 
presented mainly instrumental priming effects, with categorical effects 
remaining marginal. Moreover, the magnitude of the instrumental priming effects 
decreased with age. Finally, the priming effects observed for 7-year-old 
children depended on the task, especially for the categorical effects. The 
theoretical implications of these results for our understanding of conceptual 
reorganization from 5 to 9 years of age are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00847.x
PMID: 19840051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1278. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):938-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00840.x.

'Unwilling' versus 'unable': capuchin monkeys' (Cebus apella) understanding of 
human intentional action.

Phillips W(1), Barnes JL, Mahajan N, Yamaguchi M, Santos LR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, USA. webb.phillips@yale.edu

A sensitivity to the intentions behind human action is a crucial developmental 
achievement in infants. Is this intention reading ability a unique and 
relatively recent product of human evolution and culture, or does this capacity 
instead have roots in our non-human primate ancestors? Recent work by Call and 
colleagues (2004) lends credence to the latter hypothesis, providing evidence 
that chimpanzees are also sensitive to human intentions. Specifically, 
chimpanzees remained in a testing area longer and exhibited fewer frustration 
behaviors when an experimenter behaved as if he intended to give food but was 
unable to do so, than when the experimenter behaved as if he had no intention of 
giving food. The present research builds on and extends this paradigm, providing 
some of the first evidence of intention reading in a more distant primate 
relative, the capuchin monkey (Cebus apella). Like chimpanzees, capuchin monkeys 
distinguish between different goal-directed acts, vacating an enclosure sooner 
when an experimenter acts unwilling to give food than when she acts unable to 
give food. Additionally, we found that this pattern is specific to animate 
action, and does not obtain when the same actions are performed by inanimate 
rods instead of human hands (for a similar logic, see Woodward, 1998). Taken 
together with the previous evidence, the present research suggests that our own 
intention reading is not a wholly unique aspect of the human species, but rather 
is shared broadly across the primate order.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00840.x
PMID: 19840049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1279. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):903-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00830.x.

Children's use of gesture to resolve lexical ambiguity.

Kidd E(1), Holler J.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychological Sciences, The University of Manchester, UK. 
evan.j.kidd@manchester.ac.uk

We report on a study investigating 3-5-year-old children's use of gesture to 
resolve lexical ambiguity. Children were told three short stories that contained 
two homonym senses; for example, bat (flying mammal) and bat (sports equipment). 
They were then asked to re-tell these stories to a second experimenter. The data 
were coded for the means that children used during attempts at disambiguation: 
speech, gesture, or a combination of the two. The results indicated that the 
3-year-old children rarely disambiguated the two senses, mainly using deictic 
pointing gestures during attempts at disambiguation. In contrast, the 4-year-old 
children attempted to disambiguate the two senses more often, using a larger 
proportion of iconic gestures than the other children. The 5-year-old children 
used less iconic gestures than the 4-year-olds, but unlike the 3-year-olds, were 
able to disambiguate the senses through the verbal channel. The results 
highlight the value of gesture to the development of children's language and 
communication skills.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00830.x
PMID: 19840045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1280. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):888-902. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00828.x.

Change in action: how infants learn to walk down slopes.

Gill SV(1), Adolph KE, Vereijken B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, New York University, New York, USA.

A critical aspect of perception-action coupling is the ability to modify ongoing 
actions in accordance with variations in the environment. Infants' ability to 
modify their gait patterns to walk down shallow and steep slopes was examined at 
three nested time scales. Across sessions, a microgenetic training design showed 
rapid improvements after the first session in infants receiving concentrated 
practice walking down slopes and in infants in a control group who were tested 
only at the beginning and end of the study. Within sessions, analyses across 
easy and challenging slope angles showed that infants used a 'braking strategy' 
to curb increases in walking speed across increasingly steeper slopes. Within 
trials, comparisons of infants' gait modifications before and after stepping 
over the brink of the slopes showed that the braking strategy was planned 
prospectively. Findings illustrate how observing change in action provides 
important insights into the process of skill acquisition.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00828.x
PMCID: PMC2769020
PMID: 19840044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1281. Dev Sci. 2009 Sep;12(5):815-23. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00902.x.

Monolingual, bilingual, trilingual: infants' language experience influences the 
development of a word-learning heuristic.

Byers-Heinlein K(1), Werker JF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada. kbyers@psych.ubc.ca

How infants learn new words is a fundamental puzzle in language acquisition. To 
guide their word learning, infants exploit systematic word-learning heuristics 
that allow them to link new words to likely referents. By 17 months, infants 
show a tendency to associate a novel noun with a novel object rather than a 
familiar one, a heuristic known as disambiguation. Yet, the developmental 
origins of this heuristic remain unknown. We compared disambiguation in 17- to 
18-month-old infants from different language backgrounds to determine whether 
language experience influences its development, or whether disambiguation 
instead emerges as a result of maturation or social experience. Monolinguals 
showed strong use of disambiguation, bilinguals showed marginal use, and 
trilinguals showed no disambiguation. The number of languages being learned, but 
not vocabulary size, predicted performance. The results point to a key role for 
language experience in the development of disambiguation, and help to 
distinguish among theoretical accounts of its emergence.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00902.x
PMID: 19702772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1282. Dev Sci. 2009 Sep;12(5):753-67. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00806.x.

Categorical speech perception deficits distinguish language and reading 
impairments in children.

Robertson EK(1), Joanisse MF, Desroches AS, Ng S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, 
Canada. robertson.erin.k@gmail.com

We examined categorical speech perception in school-age children with 
developmental dyslexia or Specific Language Impairment (SLI), compared to 
age-matched and younger controls. Stimuli consisted of synthetic speech tokens 
in which place of articulation varied from 'b' to 'd'. Children were tested on 
categorization, categorization in noise, and discrimination. Phonological 
awareness skills were also assessed to examine whether these correlated with 
speech perception measures. We observed similarly good baseline categorization 
rates across all groups; however, when noise was added, the SLI group showed 
impaired categorization relative to controls, whereas dyslexic children showed 
an intact profile. The SLI group showed poorer than expected between-category 
discrimination rates, whereas this pattern was only marginal in the dyslexic 
group. Impaired phonological awareness profiles were observed in both the SLI 
and dyslexic groups; however, correlations between phonological awareness and 
speech perception scores were not significant. The results of the study suggest 
that in children with language and reading impairments, there is a significant 
relationship between receptive language and speech perception, there is at best 
a weak relationship between reading and speech perception, and indeed the 
relationship between phonological and speech perception deficits is highly 
complex.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00806.x
PMID: 19702768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1283. Dev Sci. 2009 Sep;12(5):715-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00810.x.

The modulation of visual orienting reflexes across the lifespan.

Iarocci G(1), Enns JT, Randolph B, Burack JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia, 
Canada. giarocci@sfu.ca

The development of reflexive and voluntary shifts of visual attention, as well 
as relations between the two forms of shifting, were examined in three groups of 
children (5, 7, and 9 years old), one group of young adults (24 years old), and 
two groups of senior adults (young seniors with an average age of 69 years, and 
old seniors with an average age of 81 years). The task entailed response to the 
detection of a target (black dot) in one of four possible locations in the 
visual field. Relations between reflexive and voluntary shifts of attention were 
gauged by the degree to which flash and arrow facilitation and inhibition were 
observed in response to the presentation of both arrow and flash cues together 
in one trial. All age groups oriented reflexively in response to a flash cue and 
utilized the arrow cue to orient attention strategically. When flash and arrow 
cues were presented in quick succession and thereby competed for attention, the 
youngest children and oldest seniors were least efficient and flexible in their 
approach to the orienting task as they had difficulty modulating visual 
reflexes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00810.x
PMID: 19702764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1284. Dev Sci. 2009 Jul;12(4):583-601. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00809.x.

Accommodating variability in voice and foreign accent: flexibility of early word 
representations.

Schmale R(1), Seidl A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University, USA. 
rschmale@northpark.edu

In six experiments with English-learning infants, we examined the effects of 
variability in voice and foreign accent on word recognition. We found that 
9-month-old infants successfully recognized words when two native English 
talkers with dissimilar voices produced test and familiarization items 
(Experiment 1). When the domain of variability was shifted to include 
variability in voice as well as in accent, 13-, but not 9-month-olds, recognized 
a word produced across talkers when only one had a Spanish accent (Experiments 2 
and 3). Nine-month-olds accommodated some variability in accent by recognizing 
words when the same Spanish-accented talker produced familiarization and test 
items (Experiment 4). However, 13-, but not 9-month-olds, could do so when test 
and familiarization items were produced by two distinct Spanish-accented talkers 
(Experiments 5 and 6). These findings suggest that, although monolingual 
9-month-olds have abstract phonological representations, these representations 
may not be flexible enough to accommodate the modifications found in 
foreign-accented speech.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00809.x
PMID: 19635085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1285. Dev Sci. 2009 Jul;12(4):536-48. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00797.x.

Spatial construction skills of chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and young human 
children (Homo sapiens sapiens).

Potì P(1), Hayashi M, Matsuzawa T.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, CNR, Rome, Italy. 
patrizia.poti@istc.cnr.it

Spatial construction tasks are basic tests of visual-spatial processing. Two 
studies have assessed spatial construction skills in chimpanzees (Pan 
troglodytes) and young children (Homo sapiens sapiens) with a block modelling 
task. Study 1a subjects were three young chimpanzees and five adult chimpanzees. 
Study 1b subjects were 30 human children belonging to five age groups (24, 30, 
36, 42, 48 months). Subjects were given three model constructions to reproduce: 
Line, Cross-Stack and Arch, which differed in type and number of spatial 
relations and dimensions, but required comparable configurational understanding. 
Subjects' constructions were rated for accuracy. Our results show that: (1) 
chimpanzees are relatively advanced in constructing in the vertical dimension; 
(2) Among chimpanzees only adults make accurate copies of constructions; (3) 
Chimpanzees do not develop in the direction of constructing in two dimensions as 
human children do starting from age 30 months. The pattern of development of 
construction skills in chimpanzees partially diverges from that of human 
children and indicates that spatial analysis and spatial representation are 
partially different in the two species.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00797.x
PMID: 19635081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1286. Dev Sci. 2009 Jul;12(4):499-501; discussion 502-3. doi: 
10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00868.x.

Claiming evidence from non-evidence: a reply to Morton and Harper.

Bialystok E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 
ellenb@yorku.ca

Comment on
    Dev Sci. 2007 Nov;10(6):719-26.

Morton and Harper (2007) argue that research presented in support of a bilingual 
advantage in the development of executive control has been confounded with 
social class, the actual mechanism for group differences. As evidence, they 
report a study in which a small group of monolingual and bilingual 6- and 
7-year-olds performed similarly on a Simon task. The present paper points to 
weaknesses in their experimental design, analysis, and logic that together 
undermine their criticism of the conclusion that bilingualism is responsible for 
the reported group differences.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00868.x
PMCID: PMC2737318
PMID: 19635076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1287. Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):492-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00791.x.

Face processing at birth: a Thatcher illusion study.

Leo I(1), Simion F.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Psicologia dello Sviluppo e della Socializzazione, Università 
degli Studi di Padova, Italy. irene.leo@unipd.it

The present study was aimed at exploring newborns' ability to recognize 
configural changes within real face images by testing newborns' sensitivity to 
the Thatcher illusion. Using the habituation procedure, newborns' ability to 
discriminate between an unaltered face image and the same face with the eyes and 
the mouth 180 degrees rotated (i.e. thatcherized) was investigated. Newborns 
were able to discriminate an unaltered from the thatcherized version of the same 
face when stimuli were presented in the canonical upright orientation 
(Experiment 1), but failed to discriminate the same stimuli when they were 
presented upside-down (Experiment 2). The results indicate that sensitivity to 
fine spatial information (defined as second-order relational information) in 
processing upright faces is already present at birth.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00791.x
PMID: 19371374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1288. Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):446-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00780.x.

Plasticity of ability to form cross-modal representations in infant Japanese 
macaques.

Adachi I(1), Kuwahata H, Fujita K, Tomonaga M, Matsuzawa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Graduate School of Letters, Kyoto University, 
Inuyama-city, Aichi 484-8506, Japan. adachi@pri.kyoto-u.ac.jp

In a previous study, Adachi, Kuwahata, Fujita, Tomonaga & Matsuzawa demonstrated 
that infant Japanese macaques (Macaca fuscata) form cross-modal representations 
of conspecifics but not of humans. However, because the subjects in the 
experiment were raised in a large social group and had considerably less 
exposure to humans than to conspecifics, it was an open question whether their 
lack of cross-modal representation of humans simply reflected their lower levels 
of exposure to humans or was caused by some innate restrictions on the ability. 
To answer the question, we used the same procedure but tested infant Japanese 
macaques with more extensive experience of humans in daily life. Briefly, we 
presented monkeys with a photograph of either a monkey or a human face on an LCD 
monitor after playing a vocalization of one of these two species. The subjects 
looked at the monitor longer when a voice and a face were mismatched than when 
they were matched, irrespective of whether the preceding vocalization was a 
monkey's or a human's. This suggests that once monkeys have extensive experience 
with humans, they will form a cross-modal representation of humans as well as of 
conspecifics.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00780.x
PMID: 19371369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1289. Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):396-406. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00825.x.

Categorizing words using 'frequent frames': what cross-linguistic analyses 
reveal about distributional acquisition strategies.

Chemla E(1), Mintz TH, Bernal S, Christophe A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et Psycholinguistique, DEC-ENS/EHESS, 
CNRS, Paris, France. emmanuel.chemla@ens.fr

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):407-9.
    Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):409-11.

Mintz (2003) described a distributional environment called a frame, defined as 
the co-occurrence of two context words with one intervening target word. 
Analyses of English child-directed speech showed that words that fell within any 
frequently occurring frame consistently belonged to the same grammatical 
category (e.g. noun, verb, adjective, etc.). In this paper, we first generalize 
this result to French, a language in which the function word system allows 
patterns that are potentially detrimental to a frame-based analysis procedure. 
Second, we show that the discontinuity of the chosen environments (i.e. the fact 
that target words are framed by the context words) is crucial for the mechanism 
to be efficient. This property might be relevant for any computational approach 
to grammatical categorization. Finally, we investigate a recursive application 
of the procedure and observe that the categorization is paradoxically worse when 
context elements are categories rather than actual lexical items. 
Item-specificity is thus also a core computational principle for this type of 
algorithm. Our analysis, along with results from behavioural studies (Gómez, 
2002; Gómez and Maye, 2005; Mintz, 2006), provides strong support for frames as 
a basis for the acquisition of grammatical categories by infants. Discontinuity 
and item-specificity appear to be crucial features.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00825.x
PMCID: PMC2724313
PMID: 19371362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1290. Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):369-78. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00822.x.

Statistical learning of phonetic categories: insights from a computational 
approach.

McMurray B(1), Aslin RN, Toscano JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and the Delta Center, University of Iowa, Iowa City 
52242, USA. bob-mcmurray@uiowa.edu

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):407-9.
    Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):409-11.

Recent evidence (Maye, Werker & Gerken, 2002) suggests that statistical learning 
may be an important mechanism for the acquisition of phonetic categories in the 
infant's native language. We examined the sufficiency of this hypothesis and its 
implications for development by implementing a statistical learning mechanism in 
a computational model based on a mixture of Gaussians (MOG) architecture. 
Statistical learning alone was found to be insufficient for phonetic category 
learning--an additional competition mechanism was required in order for the 
categories in the input to be successfully learnt. When competition was added to 
the MOG architecture, this class of models successfully accounted for 
developmental enhancement and loss of sensitivity to phonetic contrasts. 
Moreover, the MOG with competition model was used to explore a potentially 
important distributional property of early speech categories--sparseness--in 
which portions of the space between phonetic categories are unmapped. Sparseness 
was found in all successful models and quickly emerged during development even 
when the initial parameters favoured continuous representations with no gaps. 
The implications of these models for phonetic category learning in infants are 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00822.x
PMCID: PMC2742678
PMID: 19371359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1291. Dev Sci. 2009 Mar;12(2):314-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00787.x.

Ten-month-old infants use prior information to identify an actor's goal.

Sommerville JA(1), Crane CC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. sommej@u.washington.edu

For adults, prior information about an individual's likely goals, preferences or 
dispositions plays a powerful role in interpreting ambiguous behavior and 
predicting and interpreting behavior in novel contexts. Across two studies, we 
investigated whether 10-month-old infants' ability to identify the goal of an 
ambiguous action sequence was facilitated by seeing prior instances in which the 
actor directly pursued and obtained her goal, and whether infants could use this 
prior information to understand the actor's behavior in a new context. 
Experiment 1 demonstrated that the goal preview impacted infants' subsequent 
action understanding, but only if the preview was delivered in the same room as 
the subsequent action sequence. Experiment 2 demonstrated that infants' failure 
to transfer prior goal information across situations arose from a change in the 
room per se and not other features of the task. Our results suggest that infants 
may use their understanding of simple actions as a leverage point for 
understanding novel or ambiguous actions, but that their ability to do so is 
limited to certain types of contextual changes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00787.x
PMID: 19143804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1292. Dev Sci. 2009 Mar;12(2):305-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00767.x.

More than just another face in the crowd: superior detection of threatening 
facial expressions in children and adults.

LoBue V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904, 
USA. vl8m@virginia.edu

Threatening facial expressions can signal the approach of someone or something 
potentially dangerous. Past research has established that adults have an 
attentional bias for angry faces, visually detecting their presence more quickly 
than happy or neutral faces. Two new findings are reported here. First, evidence 
is presented that young children share this attentional bias. In five 
experiments, young children and adults were asked to find a picture of a target 
face among an array of eight distracter faces. Both age groups detected 
threat-relevant faces--angry and frightened--more rapidly than 
non-threat-relevant faces (happy and sad). Second, evidence is presented that 
both adults and children have an attentional bias for negative stimuli overall. 
All negative faces were detected more quickly than positive ones in both age 
groups. As the first evidence that young children exhibit the same superior 
detection of threatening facial expressions as adults, this research provides 
important support for the existence of an evolved attentional bias for 
threatening stimuli.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00767.x
PMID: 19143803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1293. Dev Sci. 2009 Mar;12(2):220-35. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00760.x.

Age-related changes in transient and oscillatory brain responses to auditory 
stimulation during early adolescence.

Poulsen C(1), Picton TW, Paus T.

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neuroscience Unit, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill 
University, Canada. cpoulsen@egi.com

Maturational changes in the capacity to process quickly the temporal envelope of 
sound have been linked to language abilities in typically developing 
individuals. As part of a longitudinal study of brain maturation and cognitive 
development during adolescence, we employed dense-array EEG and spatiotemporal 
source analysis to characterize maturational changes in the timing of brain 
responses to temporal variations in sound. We found significant changes in the 
brain responses compared longitudinally at two time points in early adolescence, 
namely 10 years (65 subjects) and 11.5 years (60 of the 65 subjects), as well as 
large differences between adults, studied with the same protocol (Poulsen, 
Picton & Paus, 2007), and the children at 10 and 11.5 years of age. The 
transient auditory evoked potential to tone onset showed decreases in the 
latency of vertex and T-complex components, and a highly significant increase in 
the amplitude of the N1 wave with increasing age. The auditory steady state 
response to a 40-Hz frequency-modulated tone increased in amplitude with 
increasing age. The peak frequency of the envelope-following response to sweeps 
of amplitude-modulated white noise also increased significantly with increasing 
age. These results indicate persistent maturation of the cortical mechanisms for 
auditory processing from childhood into middle adulthood.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00760.x
PMID: 19143796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1294. Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):182-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00764.x.

Early gesture selectively predicts later language learning.

Rowe ML(1), Goldin-Meadow S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, 5848 S. University Ave, 
Chicago, IL 60637, USA. rowemer@uchicago.edu

The gestures children produce predict the early stages of spoken language 
development. Here we ask whether gesture is a global predictor of language 
learning, or whether particular gestures predict particular language outcomes. 
We observed 52 children interacting with their caregivers at home, and found 
that gesture use at 18 months selectively predicted lexical versus syntactic 
skills at 42 months, even with early child speech controlled. Specifically, 
number of different meanings conveyed in gesture at 18 months predicted 
vocabulary at 42 months, but number of gesture+speech combinations did not. In 
contrast, number of gesture+speech combinations, particularly those conveying 
sentence-like ideas, produced at 18 months predicted sentence complexity at 42 
months, but meanings conveyed in gesture did not. We can thus predict particular 
milestones in vocabulary and sentence complexity at age by watching how children 
move their hands two years earlier.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00764.x
PMCID: PMC2677374
PMID: 19120426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1295. Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):165-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00739.x.

Behavioral genetic analyses of prosocial behavior in adolescents.

Gregory AM(1), Light-Häusermann JH, Rijsdijk F, Eley TC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Goldsmiths College, University of London, UK. 
a.gregory@gold.ac.uk

Prosocial behavior is an important aspect of normal social and psychological 
development. Adult and child twin studies typically estimate the heritability of 
prosocial behavior to be between 30 and 50%, although relatively little is known 
about genetic and environmental influences upon prosocial behavior in 
adolescence. We therefore examined reports of prosocial behavior in a large 
longitudinal family study of 1160 adolescent twin pairs (aged between 13 and 19 
years). Prosocial behavior was assessed at two time points by self-report and at 
the second time point by additional parent-ratings using the Strengths and 
Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ; Goodman, 1997). Adolescent females were 
reported to be significantly more prosocial than males (p < .001). Univariate 
analyses primarily showed moderate heritability and large nonshared 
environmental influences. There was a moderate genetic correlation between self- 
and parent-reported prosocial behaviour, suggesting that both types of rater 
were tapping into genetically overlapping constructs. Longitudinal analyses 
revealed that continuity was largely explained by genes. Unique environmental 
influences were predominantly time-specific and were the major source of 
individual differences.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00739.x
PMID: 19120424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1296. Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):150-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00748.x.

The relationship between second-order false belief and display rules reasoning: 
the integration of cognitive and affective social understanding.

Naito M(1), Seki Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of School Education, Joetsu University of Education, Japan. 
mikan@juen.ac.jp

To investigate the relation between cognitive and affective social 
understanding, Japanese 4- to 8-year-olds received tasks of first- and 
second-order false beliefs and prosocial and self-presentational display rules. 
From 6 to 8 years, children comprehended display rules, as well as second-order 
false belief, using social pressures justifications decreasingly and 
motivational justifications with embedded perspectives increasingly with age. 
Although not related to either type of display across ages, second-order tasks 
were associated with both types of display tasks only at 8 years when examined 
in each age group. Results suggest that children base their second-order theory 
of mind and display rules understanding on distinct reasoning until middle 
childhood, during which time the originally distinct aspects of social 
understanding are integrated.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00748.x
PMID: 19120423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1297. Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):123-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00746.x.

Logic and belief across the lifespan: the rise and fall of belief inhibition 
during syllogistic reasoning.

De Neys W(1), Van Gelder E.

Author information:
(1)Experimental Psychology Lab, University of Leuven, Belgium. 
Wim.Deneys@psy.kuleuven.be

Popular reasoning theories postulate that the ability to inhibit inappropriate 
beliefs lies at the heart of the human reasoning engine. Given that people's 
inhibitory capacities are known to rise and fall across the lifespan, we 
predicted that people's deductive reasoning performance would show similar 
curvilinear age trends. A group of children (12-year-olds), young adults 
(20-year-olds), and older adults (65+-year-olds) were presented with a classic 
syllogistic reasoning task and a decision-making questionnaire. Results 
indicated that on syllogisms where beliefs and logic conflicted, reasoning 
performance showed the expected curvilinear age trend: Reasoning performance 
initially increased from childhood to early adulthood but declined again in 
later life. On syllogisms where beliefs and logic were consistent and sound 
reasoning did not require belief inhibition, however, age did not affect 
performance. Furthermore, across the lifespan we observed that the better people 
were at resisting intuitive temptations in the decision-making task, the less 
they were biased by their beliefs on the conflict syllogisms. As with the effect 
of age, one's ability to override intuitions in the decision-making task did not 
mediate reasoning performance on the no-conflict syllogisms. Results lend 
credence to the postulated central role of inhibitory processing in those 
situations where beliefs and logic conflict.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00746.x
PMID: 19120420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1298. Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):96-105. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00737.x.

Toddlers can adaptively change how they categorize: same objects, same session, 
two different categorical distinctions.

Horst JS(1), Ellis AE, Samuelson LK, Trejo E, Worzalla SL, Peltan JR, Oakes LM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Iowa, USA.

Two experiments demonstrate that 14- to 18-month-old toddlers can adaptively 
change how they categorize a set of objects within a single session, and that 
this ability is related to vocabulary size. In both experiments, toddlers were 
presented with a sequential touching task with objects that could be categorized 
either according to some perceptually salient dimension corresponding to a 
taxonomic distinction (e.g. animals vs. vehicles) or to some less obvious 
dimension (e.g. rigid vs. deformable). In each experiment, children with larger 
productive vocabularies responded to both dimensions, showing evidence of 
sensitivity to each way of categorizing the items. Children with smaller 
productive vocabularies attended only to the taxonomically related categorical 
grouping. These experiments confirm that toddlers can adaptively shift the basis 
of their categorization and highlight the dynamic interaction between the child 
and the current task in early categorization.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00737.x
PMCID: PMC2997669
PMID: 19120417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1299. Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):48-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00742.x.

Early bilingualism enhances mechanisms of false-belief reasoning.

Kovács AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neuroscience Sector, SISSA, Trieste, Italy. kovacs@sissa.it

In their first years, children's understanding of mental states seems to improve 
dramatically, but the mechanisms underlying these changes are still unclear. 
Such 'theory of mind' (ToM) abilities may arise during development, or have an 
innate basis, developmental changes reflecting limitations of other abilities 
involved in ToM tasks (e.g. inhibition). Special circumstances such as early 
bilingualism may enhance ToM development or other capacities required by ToM 
tasks. Here we compare 3-year-old bilinguals and monolinguals on a standard ToM 
task, a modified ToM task and a control task involving physical reasoning. The 
modified ToM task mimicked a language-switch situation that bilinguals often 
encounter and that could influence their ToM abilities. If such experience 
contributes to an early consolidation of ToM in bilinguals, they should be 
selectively enhanced in the modified task. In contrast, if bilinguals have an 
advantage due to better executive inhibitory abilities involved in ToM tasks, 
they should outperform monolinguals on both ToM tasks, inhibitory demands being 
similar. Bilingual children showed an advantage on the two ToM tasks but not on 
the control task. The precocious success of bilinguals may be associated with 
their well-developed control functions formed during monitoring and selecting 
languages.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00742.x
PMID: 19120412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1300. Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):1-18. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00754.x.

A hierarchical competing systems model of the emergence and early development of 
executive function.

Marcovitch S(1), Zelazo PD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, 
Greensboro, NC 27402-6170, USA. s_marcov@uncg.edu

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):19-20; discussion 24-5.
    Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):20-2; discussion 24-5.
    Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):22-3; discussion 24-5.

The hierarchical competing systems model (HCSM) provides a framework for 
understanding the emergence and early development of executive function--the 
cognitive processes underlying the conscious control of behavior--in the context 
of search for hidden objects. According to this model, behavior is determined by 
the joint influence of a developmentally invariant habit system and a conscious 
representational system that becomes increasingly influential as children 
develop. This article describes a computational formalization of the HCSM, 
reviews behavioral and computational research consistent with the model, and 
suggests directions for future research on the development of executive 
function.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00754.x
PMCID: PMC2842568
PMID: 19120405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1301. Dev Sci. 2008 Nov;11(6):803-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00770.x.

Quantitative competencies in infancy.

Cordes S(1), Brannon EM.

Author information:
(1)Duke University Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Durham, NC 27708, USA. 
scordes@duke.edu

We review recently published papers that have contributed to our understanding 
of how the preverbal infant represents number, area and time. We review evidence 
that infants rely on two distinct systems to represent number nonverbally and 
highlight the similarities in the ratio-dependent discrimination of number, time 
and area. Contrary to earlier assertions that continuous dimensions are more 
salient (and thus more discriminable) to the infant than numerosity, we argue 
that the opposite conclusion is better supported by the data. The preverbal 
infant may be better able to extract numerosity than continuous variables from 
arrays of discrete items.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00770.x
PMID: 19046148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1302. Dev Sci. 2008 Sep;11(5):743-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00724.x.

Children's use of geometry for reorientation.

Lee SA(1), Spelke ES.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. 
lee@wjh.harvard.edu

Research on navigation has shown that humans and laboratory animals recover 
their sense of orientation primarily by detecting geometric properties of 
large-scale surface layouts (e.g. room shape), but the reasons for the primacy 
of layout geometry have not been clarified. In four experiments, we tested 
whether 4-year-old children reorient by the geometry of extended wall-like 
surfaces because such surfaces are large and perceived as stable, because they 
serve as barriers to vision or to locomotion, or because they form a single, 
connected geometric figure. Disoriented children successfully reoriented by the 
shape of an arena formed by surfaces that were short enough to see and step 
over. In contrast, children failed to reorient by the shape of an arena defined 
by large and stable columns or by connected lines on the floor. We conclude that 
preschool children's reorientation is not guided by the functional relevance of 
the immediate environmental properties, but rather by a specific sensitivity to 
the geometric properties of the extended three-dimensional surface layout.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00724.x
PMID: 18801130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1303. Dev Sci. 2008 Sep;11(5):732-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00723.x.

Children's performance in mental rotation tasks: orientation-free features 
flatten the slope.

Perrucci V(1), Agnoli F, Albiero P.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Psicologia dello Sviluppo e della Socializzazione, University 
of Padua, Padova, Italy.

Studies of the development of mental rotation have yielded conflicting results, 
apparently because different mental rotation tasks draw on different cognitive 
abilities. Children may compare two stimuli at different orientations without 
mental rotation if the stimuli contain orientation-free features. Two groups of 
children (78 6-year-olds and 92 8-year-olds) participated in an experiment 
investigating development of the ability to mentally rotate and the ability to 
recognize and use orientation-free features. Children compared two stimuli, one 
upright and one rotated, and responded as quickly as possible indicating whether 
the stimuli were the same or different. The stimuli were either two panda bears 
or two ice-cream cones with three scoops of ice-cream of different colors. The 
panda bears were either identical or mirror images. The cones were either 
identical, mirror images, or non-mirror images. Response times increased 
linearly as a function of the angle of orientation when stimuli were the same 
and when the stimuli were mirror images. But response times were much less 
dependent on angle of orientation for non-mirror image stimuli. Children as 
young as 6 years recognized orientation-free stimulus features and responded 
without mentally rotating when the task permitted this strategy.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00723.x
PMID: 18801129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1304. Dev Sci. 2008 Sep;11(5):712-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00721.x.

The impact of specific prior experiences on infants' extension of animal 
properties.

Furrer SD(1), Younger BA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Hastings College, Hastings, NE 68901, USA. 
sfurrer@hastings.edu

We examined the influence of prior exposure to specific animal properties on 
15-month-old infants' inductive generalization. Using picture books, 29 infants 
were trained on properties linked in a congruent or incongruent manner with four 
animal categories. A generalized imitation task was then administered to assess 
patterns of property extension for two of the trained properties as well as two 
untrained properties aligned with the training categories. Prior exposure to 
particular category-property relations was shown to impact infants' property 
extensions in that infants selected a novel member of the training category for 
their imitation. For untrained properties, infants selected equally between 
novel members of the training and non-training categories. The findings 
highlight the dynamic nature of inductive processes in infancy.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00721.x
PMID: 18801127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1305. Dev Sci. 2008 Sep;11(5):662-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00715.x.

Development of number combination skill in the early school years: when do 
fingers help?

Jordan NC(1), Kaplan D, Ramineni C, Locuniak MN.

Author information:
(1)School of Education, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716, USA. 
njordan@udel.edu

Children's change over time in frequency of finger use on number combinations 
was examined in relation to their change in accuracy. Performance was tracked 
longitudinally over 11 time points, from the beginning of kindergarten (mean age 
= 5.7 years) to the end of second grade (n= 217). Accuracy in number 
combinations increased steadily during the time period while frequency of finger 
use declined. Correlations between finger use and accuracy decreased gradually, 
ranging from 0.60 in kindergarten to -0.15 at the end of second grade. 
Low-income children showed linear growth in frequency of finger use while 
middle-income children slowed down by second grade and even started to decline. 
Although girls and boys showed similar growth patterns in frequency and 
accuracy, boys used their fingers less often than girls and were more accurate. 
The findings indicate that finger use is most adaptive when children are first 
learning number combinations, but this benefit lessens over time.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00715.x
PMID: 18801121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1306. Dev Sci. 2008 Sep;11(5):644-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00712.x.

Domain-specific and domain-general changes in children's development of number 
comparison.

Holloway ID(1), Ansari D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Western Ontario, Ontario, Canada.

The numerical distance effect (inverse relationship between numerical distance 
and reaction time in relative number comparison tasks) has frequently been used 
to characterize the mental representation of number. The size of the distance 
effect decreases over developmental time. However, it is unclear whether this 
reduction simply reflects developmental changes in domain-general speed of 
processing and whether it is specific to numerical compared with non-numerical 
magnitude. To examine these open questions, we conducted a cross-sectional study 
with 6-, 7-, and 8-year-old children as well as adult college students. 
Participants performed comparisons on Arabic numerals, arrays of squares, 
squares of varying luminance and bars of varying height. To control for general 
age-related changes in reaction time, a measure of speed of processing was used 
as a covariate in the analysis. A significant developmental decrease in the 
distance effect was found across numerical and non-numerical comparison tasks 
over and above general changes in processing speed. However, this change was not 
found to differ as a function of format. These data suggest that developmental 
changes in the distance effect are reflective of changes in a domain-general 
comparison process, rather than domain-specific developmental changes in number 
representations. However, analysis of overall reaction times revealed 
significantly greater developmental changes for numerical relative to 
non-numerical comparison tasks. These findings highlight the importance of 
taking multiple measures into account when characterizing developmental changes 
in numerical magnitude processing. Implications for theories of numerical 
cognition and its development are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00712.x
PMID: 18801118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1307. Dev Sci. 2008 Jul;11(4):607-19. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00705.x.

Encoding the goal of an object-directed but uncompleted reaching action in 6- 
and 9-month-old infants.

Daum MM(1), Prinz W, Aschersleben G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain 
Sciences, Leipzig, Germany. moritz.daum@cbs.mpg.de

Infants start to interpret completed human actions as goal-directed in the 
second half of the first year of life. In a series of three studies, the 
understanding of a goal-directed but uncompleted action was investigated in 6- 
and 9-month-old infants using a preferential looking paradigm. Infants saw the 
video of an actor's reaching movement towards one of two objects. This reaching 
movement was only presented until the hand passed the midpoint between the 
starting position and the position of the target object. Subsequently, two final 
states of the reaching movement were presented simultaneously. In the plausible 
final state, the hand grasped the object to which the reaching movement was 
geared; in the implausible final state, the hand grasped the other object. In 
Studies 1 and 3, infants watched the actor from an allocentric perspective, and 
in Studies 2 and 3 from an egocentric perspective. Results indicate a 
discrimination of the two final states if the scene was presented from an 
allocentric perspective: both 6- and 9-month-olds looked longer at the 
implausible final state. This was not the case if infants saw the action from an 
egocentric perspective. The presented findings show that using this paradigm, 
6-month-olds are already able to infer the goal of an uncompleted action without 
seeing the achievement of the goal itself. However, they encoded the goal of the 
reaching action only when it was presented from an allocentric perspective but 
not from an egocentric perspective.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00705.x
PMID: 18576968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1308. Dev Sci. 2008 Jul;11(4):556-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00701.x.

Preschoolers' sensitivity to referential ambiguity: evidence for a dissociation 
between implicit understanding and explicit behavior.

Nilsen ES(1), Graham SA, Smith S, Chambers CG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Calgary, Canada.

Four-year-olds were asked to assess an adult listener's knowledge of the 
location of a hidden sticker after the listener was provided an ambiguous or 
unambiguous description of the sticker location. When preschoolers possessed 
private knowledge about the sticker location, the location they chose indicated 
that they judged a description to be unambiguous even when the message was 
ambiguous from the listener's perspective. However, measures of implicit 
awareness (response latencies and eye movement measures) demonstrated that even 
when preschoolers had private knowledge about the sticker location, ambiguous 
messages led to more consideration of an alternative location and longer 
response latencies than unambiguous messages. The findings demonstrate that 
children show sensitivity to linguistic ambiguity earlier than previously 
thought and, further, that they can detect linguistic ambiguity in language 
directed to others even when their own knowledge clarifies the intended meaning.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00701.x
PMID: 18576963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1309. Dev Sci. 2008 Jul;11(4):504-15. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00696.x.

Conflicting cues in a dynamic search task are reflected in children's eye 
movements and search errors.

Haddad JM(1), Kloos H, Keen R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts - Amherst, USA.

Three-year-olds were given a search task with conflicting cues about the 
target's location. A ball rolled behind a transparent screen and stopped behind 
one of four opaque doors mounted into the screen. A wall that protruded above 
one door provided a visible cue of blockage in the ball's path, while the 
transparent screen allowed visual tracking of the ball's progress to its last 
disappearance. On some trials these cues agreed and on others they conflicted. 
One group saw the ball appear to pass through the wall, violating its solidity, 
and another group saw the ball stop early, behind a door before the visual wall. 
Children's eye movements were recorded with an Applied Science Laboratories eye 
tracker during these real object events. On congruent trials, children tended to 
track the ball to the visible barrier and select that door. During conflict 
trials, children's eye movements and reaching errors reflected the type of 
conflict they experienced. Our data support Scholl and Leslie's (1999) 
hypotheses that spatio-temporal and contact mechanical knowledge are based on 
two separate, distinct mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00696.x
PMCID: PMC2542982
PMID: 18576958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1310. Dev Sci. 2008 Jul;11(4):467-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00692.x.

The development of articulatory signatures in children.

Singh L(1), Singh NC.

Author information:
(1)National Brain Research Centre, Manesar, India.

The ability to perceive and produce sounds at multiple time scales is a skill 
necessary for the acquisition of language. Unlike speech perception, which 
develops early in life, the production of speech sounds starts at a few months 
and continues into late childhood with the development of speech-motor skills. 
Though there is detailed information available on early phonological 
development, there is very little information on when various articulatory 
features achieve adult-like maturity. We use modern spectral analysis to 
investigate the development of three language features associated with three 
different timescales in vocal utterances from typically developing children 
between 4 and 8 years. We make comparisons with adult speech and find age 
dependence in the appearance of these features. Results suggest that as children 
get older they exhibit increasingly more power in features associated with 
shorter time scales, thereby indicating the maturation of fine motor control in 
speech. Such data from typically developing children could provide milestones of 
speech production at different timescales. Since impairments in spoken language 
often provide the first warning signs of a language disorder we suggest that 
speech production could also be used to probe language disorders.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00692.x
PMID: 18576954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1311. Dev Sci. 2008 Jul;11(4):433-48. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00689.x.

Differentiation and integration: guiding principles for analyzing cognitive 
change.

Siegler RS(1), Chen Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, 
USA. rs7k@andrew.cmu.edu

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2008 Jul;11(4):449-53.

Differentiation and integration played large roles within classic developmental 
theories but have been relegated to obscurity within contemporary theories. 
However, they may have a useful role to play in modern theories as well, if 
conceptualized as guiding principles for analyzing change rather than as 
real-time mechanisms. In the present study, we used this perspective to examine 
which rules children use, the order in which the rules emerge, and the 
effectiveness of instruction on water displacement problems. We found that 
children used systematic rules to solve such problems, and that the rules 
progress from undifferentiated to differentiated forms and toward increasingly 
accurate integration of the differentiated variables. Asking children to explain 
both why correct answers were correct and why incorrect answers were incorrect 
proved more effective than only requesting explanations of correct answers, 
which was more effective than just receiving feedback on the correctness of 
answers. Requests for explanations appeared to operate through helping children 
notice potential explanatory variables, formulate more advanced rules, and 
generalize the rules to novel problems.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00689.x
PMID: 18576951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1312. Dev Sci. 2008 May;11(3):371-89. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00682.x.

Critical periods and catastrophic interference effects in the development of 
self-organizing feature maps.

Richardson FM(1), Thomas MS.

Author information:
(1)Developmental Neurocognition Lab, School of Psychology, Birkbeck College, 
University of London, UK. f.richardson@bbk.ac.uk

The use of self-organizing feature maps (SOFM) in models of cognitive 
development has frequently been associated with explanations of critical or 
sensitive periods. By contrast, error-driven connectionist models of development 
have been linked with catastrophic interference between new knowledge and old 
knowledge. We introduce a set of simulations that systematically evaluate the 
conditions under which SOFMs demonstrate critical/sensitive periods in 
development versus those under which they display interference effects. We 
explored the relative contribution of network parameters (for example, whether 
learning rate and neighbourhood reduce across training), the representational 
resources available to the network, and the similarity between old and new 
knowledge in determining the functional plasticity of the maps. The SOFMs that 
achieved the best discrimination and topographic organization also exhibited 
sensitive periods in development while showing lower plasticity and hence 
limited interference. However, fast developing, coarser SOFMs also produced 
topologically organized representations, while permanently retaining their 
plasticity. We argue that the impact of map organization on behaviour must be 
interpreted in terms of the cognitive processes that the map is driving.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00682.x
PMID: 18466371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1313. Dev Sci. 2008 May;11(3):361-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00681.x.

Hemodynamic response to featural changes in the occipital and inferior temporal 
cortex in infants: a preliminary methodological exploration.

Wilcox T(1), Bortfeld H, Woods R, Wruck E, Boas DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, 
USA. tgw@psyc.tamu.edu

Over the past 30 years researchers have learned a great deal about the 
development of object processing in infancy. In contrast, little is understood 
about the neural mechanisms that underlie this capacity, in large part because 
there are few techniques available to measure brain functioning in human 
infants. The present research examined the extent to which near-infrared 
spectroscopy (NIRS), an optical imaging technique, could be used to assess the 
relation between object processing and brain functioning. Infants aged 6.5 
months were presented with an occlusion event involving objects that differed on 
many feature dimensions (multi-featural change), differed on shape only (shape 
change) or color only (color change), or did not differ (control). NIRS data 
were collected in the occipital and inferior temporal cortex. In the occipital 
cortex, a significant increase in oxyhemoglobin (HbO(2)) was observed in 
response to all four events and these responses did not differ significantly 
from each other. In the inferior temporal cortex, a significant increase in 
HbO(2 )was observed in the multi-featural and the shape change condition but not 
in the control condition. An increase was also observed in the color change 
condition but this increase did not differ significantly from baseline nor did 
it differ significantly from the response obtained in the control condition. 
These data were discussed in terms of (a) what they suggest about the neural 
basis of feature processing in infants and (b) the viability of using NIRS to 
study brain-behavior relations in infants.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00681.x
PMCID: PMC2584206
PMID: 18466370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1314. Dev Sci. 2008 May;11(3):F17-23. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00672.x.

Representational momentum and children's sensori-motor representations of 
objects.

Perry LK(1), Smith LB, Hockema SA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Recent research has shown that 2-year-olds fail at a task that ostensibly only 
requires the ability to understand that solid objects cannot pass through other 
solid objects. Two experiments were conducted in which 2- and 3-year-olds judged 
the stopping point of an object as it moved at varying speeds along a path and 
behind an occluder, stopping at a barrier visible above the occluder. 
Three-year-olds were able to take into account the barrier when searching for 
the object, while 2-year-olds were not. However, both groups judged faster 
moving objects to travel farther as indicated by their incorrect reaches. Thus, 
the results show that young children's sensori-motor representations exhibit a 
form of representational momentum. This unifies the perceptually based 
representations of early childhood with adults' dynamic representations that 
incorporate physical regularities but that are also available to conscious 
reasoning.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00672.x
PMID: 18466366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1315. Dev Sci. 2008 Mar;11(2):237-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00674.x.

Functional neuroimaging of speech perception during a pivotal period in language 
acquisition.

Redcay E(1), Haist F, Courchesne E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego, USA. 
eredcay@ucsd.edu

A pivotal period in the development of language occurs in the second year of 
life, when language comprehension undergoes rapid acceleration. However, the 
brain bases of these advances remain speculative as there is currently no 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data from healthy, typically 
developing toddlers at this age. We investigated the neural basis of speech 
comprehension in this critical age period by measuring fMRI activity during 
passive speech comprehension in 10 toddlers (mean +/- SD; 21 +/- 4 mo) and 10 
3-year-old children (39 +/- 3 mo) during natural sleep. During sleep, the 
children were presented passages of forward and backward speech in 20-second 
blocks separated by 20-second periods of no sound presentation. Toddlers 
produced significantly greater activation in frontal, occipital, and cerebellar 
regions than 3-year-old children in response to forward speech. Our results 
suggest that rapid language acquisition during the second year of life may 
require the utilization of frontal, cerebellar, and occipital regions in 
addition to classical superior temporal language areas. These findings are 
consistent with the interactive specialization hypothesis, which proposes that 
cognitive abilities develop from the interaction of brain regions that include 
and extend beyond those used in the adult brain.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00674.x
PMID: 18333980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1316. Dev Sci. 2008 Mar;11(2):185-94. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00664.x.

Taking stock as theories of word learning take shape.

Booth AE(1), Waxman SR.

Author information:
(1)Roxelyn and Richard Pepper Department of Communication Sciences & Disorders, 
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208-3540, USA. a-booth@northwestern.edu

In this paper we consider the perceptual and conceptual contributions that shape 
early word learning, using research on the shape bias as a case in point. In our 
view, conceptual, linguistic, social-pragmatic, and perceptual sources of 
information influence one another powerfully and continuously in the service of 
word learning throughout infancy and early childhood. We articulate several key 
points of convergence and divergence between our theoretical perspective and 
that of the attentional learning account. Finally, we consider the broader 
implications of this debate for clarifying the forces that constrain 
development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00664.x
PMID: 18333973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1317. Dev Sci. 2008 Jan;11(1):135-55. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00634.x.

Growth-related neural reorganization and the autism phenotype: a test of the 
hypothesis that altered brain growth leads to altered connectivity.

Lewis JD(1), Elman JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Science, University of California at San Diego, USA. 
jdlewis@ucsd.edu

Theoretical considerations, and findings from computational modeling, 
comparative neuroanatomy and developmental neuroscience, motivate the hypothesis 
that a deviant brain growth trajectory will lead to deviant patterns of change 
in cortico-cortical connectivity. Differences in brain size during development 
will alter the relative cost and effectiveness of short- and long-distance 
connections, and should thus impact the growth and retention of connections. 
Reduced brain size should favor long-distance connectivity; brain overgrowth 
should favor short-distance connectivity; and inconsistent deviations from the 
normal growth trajectory - as occurs in autism - should result in potentially 
disruptive changes to established patterns of functional and physical 
connectivity during development. To explore this hypothesis, neural networks 
which modeled inter-hemispheric interaction were grown at the rate of either 
typically developing children or children with autism. The influence of the 
length of the inter-hemispheric connections was analyzed at multiple 
developmental time-points. The networks that modeled autistic growth were less 
affected by removal of the inter-hemispheric connections than those that modeled 
normal growth - indicating a reduced reliance on long-distance connections - for 
short response times, and this difference increased substantially at 
approximately 24 simulated months of age. The performance of the networks showed 
a corresponding decline during development. And direct analysis of the 
connection weights showed a parallel reduction in connectivity. These modeling 
results support the hypothesis that the deviant growth trajectory in autism 
spectrum disorders may lead to a disruption of established patterns of 
functional connectivity during development, with potentially negative behavioral 
consequences, and a subsequent reduction in physical connectivity. The results 
are discussed in relation to the growing body of evidence of reduced functional 
and structural connectivity in autism, and in relation to the behavioral 
phenotype, particularly the developmental aspects.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00634.x
PMCID: PMC2706588
PMID: 18171375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1318. Dev Sci. 2008 Jan;11(1):122-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00653.x.

Statistical phonetic learning in infants: facilitation and feature 
generalization.

Maye J(1), Weiss DJ, Aslin RN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Communication Sciences & Disorders and the Northwestern 
Institute on Complex Systems, Northwestern University, USA. 
j-maye@northwestern.edu

Over the course of the first year of life, infants develop from being 
generalized listeners, capable of discriminating both native and non-native 
speech contrasts, into specialized listeners whose discrimination patterns 
closely reflect the phonetic system of the native language(s). Recent work by 
Maye, Werker and Gerken (2002) has proposed a statistical account for this 
phenomenon, showing that infants may lose the ability to discriminate some 
foreign language contrasts on the basis of their sensitivity to the statistical 
distribution of sounds in the input language. In this paper we examine the 
process of enhancement in infant speech perception, whereby initially difficult 
phonetic contrasts become better discriminated when they define two categories 
that serve a functional role in the native language. In particular, we 
demonstrate that exposure to a bimodal statistical distribution in 8-month-old 
infants' phonetic input can lead to increased discrimination of difficult 
contrasts. In addition, this exposure also facilitates discrimination of an 
unfamiliar contrast sharing the same phonetic feature as the contrast presented 
during familiarization, suggesting that infants extract acoustic/phonetic 
information that is invariant across an abstract featural representation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00653.x
PMID: 18171374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1319. Dev Sci. 2008 Jan;11(1):60-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00659.x.

Fearful faces modulate looking duration and attention disengagement in 
7-month-old infants.

Peltola MJ(1), Leppänen JM, Palokangas T, Hietanen JK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Tampere, Finland. 
mikko.peltola@uta.fi

The present study investigated whether facial expressions modulate visual 
attention in 7-month-old infants. First, infants' looking duration to 
individually presented fearful, happy, and novel facial expressions was compared 
to looking duration to a control stimulus (scrambled face). The face with a 
novel expression was included to examine the hypothesis that the earlier 
findings of greater allocation of attention to fearful as compared to happy 
faces could be due to the novelty of fearful faces in infants' rearing 
environment. The infants looked longer at the fearful face than at the control 
stimulus, whereas no such difference was found between the other expressions and 
the control stimulus. Second, a gap/overlap paradigm was used to determine 
whether facial expressions affect the infants' ability to disengage their 
fixation from a centrally presented face and shift attention to a peripheral 
target. It was found that infants disengaged their fixation significantly less 
frequently from fearful faces than from control stimuli and happy faces. Novel 
facial expressions did not have a similar effect on attention disengagement. 
Thus, it seems that adult-like modulation of the disengagement of attention by 
threat-related stimuli can be observed early in life, and that the influence of 
emotionally salient (fearful) faces on visual attention is not simply 
attributable to the novelty of these expressions in infants' rearing 
environment.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00659.x
PMID: 18171368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1320. Dev Sci. 2008 Jan;11(1):53-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00645.x.

Fourteen-month-olds pay attention to vowels in novel words.

Mani N(1), Plunkett K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, UK. 
nivedita.mani@psy.ox.ac.uk

Recent research has shown that infants are sensitive to mispronunciations of 
words when tested using a preferential looking task. The results of these 
studies indicate that infants are able to access the phonological detail of 
words when engaged in lexical recognition. However, most of this work has 
focused on mispronunciations of consonants in familiar and novel words. Very 
little is known about the role that vowels play in constraining lexical access 
during the early stages of lexical development. We describe a word learning 
study with 14- and 18-month-old infants that tests their sensitivity to 
mispronunciations of word-medial vowels using a preferential looking task. We 
found that both age groups demonstrated recognition of correctly pronounced 
tokens of the newly learnt words but not mispronounced tokens. These results 
indicate that vowels constrain lexical access of novel words by as early as 14 
months of age, and add to the growing body of literature indicating that infants 
exploit detailed phonological information when processing both familiar and 
newly learnt words.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00645.x
PMID: 18171367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1321. Dev Sci. 2008 Jan;11(1):17-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00648.x.

Heritability of antisocial behaviour at 9: do callous-unemotional traits matter?

Viding E(1), Jones AP, Frick PJ, Moffitt TE, Plomin R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University College London, and SGDP Centre, 
Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, London, UK. e.viding@ucl.ac.uk

A previous finding from our group indicated that teacher-rated antisocial 
behaviour (AB) among 7-year-olds is particularly heritable in the presence of 
callous-unemotional (CU) traits. Using a sample of 1865 same-sex twin pairs, we 
employed DeFries-Fulker extremes analysis to investigate whether teacher-rated 
AB with/without CU traits also shows aetiological differences among 9-year-olds. 
Furthermore, we assessed whether the differences in the magnitude of 
heritability would be evident even when hyperactive symptoms were controlled for 
in the statistical analysis. AB among 9-year-olds was more heritable with than 
without concomitant CU. The heritability difference was even more pronounced in 
magnitude when hyperactive symptoms were controlled. CU traits thus appear to 
index one valid way of sub-typing children with early-onset AB.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00648.x
PMID: 18171362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1322. Dev Sci. 2008 Jan;11(1):1-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00652.x.

Preference for language in early infancy: the human language bias is not speech 
specific.

Krentz UC(1), Corina DP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Washington, USA. krentu@spu.edu

Fundamental to infants' acquisition of their native language is an inherent 
interest in the language spoken around them over non-linguistic environmental 
sounds. The following studies explored whether the bias for linguistic signals 
in hearing infants is specific to speech, or reflects a general bias for all 
human language, spoken and signed. Results indicate that 6-month-old infants 
prefer an unfamiliar, visual-gestural language (American Sign Language) over 
non-linguistic pantomime, but 10-month-olds do not. These data provide evidence 
against a speech-specific bias in early infancy and provide insights into those 
properties of human languages that may underlie this language-general 
attentional bias.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00652.x
PMID: 18171360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1323. Dev Sci. 2007 Nov;10(6):794-813. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00628.x.

The development of sentence interpretation: effects of perceptual, attentional 
and semantic interference.

Leech R(1), Aydelott J, Symons G, Carnevale J, Dick F.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Birkbeck College, London, UK. r.leech@bbk.ac.uk

How does the development and consolidation of perceptual, attentional, and 
higher cognitive abilities interact with language acquisition and processing? We 
explored children's (ages 5-17) and adults' (ages 18-51) comprehension of 
morphosyntactically varied sentences under several competing speech conditions 
that varied in the degree of attentional demands, auditory masking, and semantic 
interference. We also evaluated the relationship between subjects' syntactic 
comprehension and their word reading efficiency and general 'speed of 
processing'. We found that the interactions between perceptual and attentional 
processes and complex sentence interpretation changed considerably over the 
course of development. Perceptual masking of the speech signal had an early and 
lasting impact on comprehension, particularly for more complex sentence 
structures. In contrast, increased attentional demand in the absence of 
energetic auditory masking primarily affected younger children's comprehension 
of difficult sentence types. Finally, the predictability of syntactic 
comprehension abilities by external measures of development and expertise is 
contingent upon the perceptual, attentional, and semantic milieu in which 
language processing takes place.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00628.x
PMID: 17973797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1324. Dev Sci. 2007 Nov;10(6):747-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00610.x.

The effects of prohibiting gestures on children's lexical retrieval ability.

Pine KJ(1), Bird H, Kirk E.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Hertfordshire, Hertfordshire, UK. 
K.J.Pine@herts.ac.uk

Two alternative accounts have been proposed to explain the role of gestures in 
thinking and speaking. The Information Packaging Hypothesis (Kita, 2000) claims 
that gestures are important for the conceptual packaging of information before 
it is coded into a linguistic form for speech. The Lexical Retrieval Hypothesis 
(Rauscher, Krauss & Chen, 1996) sees gestures as functioning more at the level 
of speech production in helping the speaker to find the right words. The latter 
hypothesis has not been fully explored with children. In this study children 
were given a naming task under conditions that allowed and restricted gestures. 
Children named more words correctly and resolved more 'tip-of-the-tongue' states 
when allowed to gesture than when not, suggesting that gestures facilitate 
access to the lexicon in children and are important for speech production as 
well as conceptualization.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00610.x
PMID: 17973791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1325. Dev Sci. 2007 Nov;10(6):719-26. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00623.x.

What did Simon say? Revisiting the bilingual advantage.

Morton JB(1), Harper SN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada. 
bmorton3@uwo.ca

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2009 Jul;12(4):499-501; discussion 502-3.

Bilingual children often outperform monolingual children in tasks of cognitive 
control. This advantage may be a consequence of the fact that bilinguals have 
more practice controlling attention due to an ongoing need to manage two 
languages. However, existing evidence is limited because possible differences in 
ethnicity and socioeconomic status have not been properly controlled. To address 
this issue, we administered the Simon task to bilingual and monolingual children 
of identical ethnic and socioeconomic backgrounds. Bilingual and monolingual 
children performed identically, whereas children from higher SES families were 
advantaged relative to children from lower SES families. Controlling differences 
in SES and ethnicity may attenuate the bilingual advantage in cognitive control.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00623.x
PMID: 17973787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1326. Dev Sci. 2007 Sep;10(5):694-711. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00618.x.

Using cardinality to compare quantities: the role of social-cognitive conflict 
in early numeracy.

Muldoon KP(1), Lewis C, Francis B.

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, UK. 
k.muldoon@hw.ac.uk

A key question in early number development is how 4- and 5-year-olds learn the 
roles that counting and cardinal numbers play when comparing quantities. 
Children who wrongly used length to identify numerosity were assigned to five 
experimental groups and trained to judge whether a puppet--who sometimes 
miscounted--created equivalent sets. Over three training sessions, children who 
were asked to compare sets after they were counted learned to base their 
judgments on cardinal numbers when the puppet counted accurately by being given 
feedback. However, only the groups who were also asked to explain either their 
own or the experimenter's reasoning made progress in identifying the puppet's 
miscounts. This ability to recognize the importance of counting accuracy for 
quantitative comparisons predicted whether children would spontaneously count to 
compare sets on a post-test. The importance of asking children to identify 
miscounts is discussed alongside the social factors that influence children's 
recognition of the relationship between procedural counting, cardinality and 
relative number.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00618.x
PMID: 17683352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1327. Dev Sci. 2007 Sep;10(5):681-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00612.x.

Development of beliefs about storybook reality.

Woolley JD(1), Cox V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712, USA. 
woolley@psy.utexas.edu

The goal of this research was to assess children's beliefs about the reality 
status of storybook characters and events. In Experiment 1, 156 preschool age 
children heard realistic, fantastical, or religious stories, and their 
understanding of the reality status of the characters and events in the stories 
was assessed. Results revealed that 3-year-olds were more likely to judge 
characters as real than were 4- and 5-year-olds, but most children judged all 
characters as not real for all story types. Children of all ages who heard 
realistic stories made more claims that the events in the stories could happen 
in real life than did children who heard fantastical stories. Five-year-olds 
made significantly more claims that events in religious stories could happen in 
real life than did younger children. In Experiment 2, 136 4- and 5-year-olds 
heard similar stories. Results replicated those from Experiment 1, and also 
indicated a growing awareness of the basic nature of realistic fiction.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00612.x
PMID: 17683351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1328. Dev Sci. 2007 Sep;10(5):664-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00613.x.

The development of attention regulation in the Wisconsin Card Sorting Task.

Somsen RJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Psychology, University of Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. m.w.vandermolen@uva.nl

The present study examined performance on a computerized version of the 
Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST) in participants between 6 and 18 years. Test 
trials were presented upon request, without time constraints, and with a direct 
coupling between the participant's response and the onset of the feedback. The 
pattern of findings that emerged from the self-controlled computerized WCST 
permitted unique insights into the developmental changes in reasoning and 
attention regulation during childhood and adolescence. The number of WCST 
categories achieved developed linearly between 6 and 11 years and asymptoted 
beyond this age, whereas attentional responses continued to develop. More 
specifically, a decrease in distractive attention to correct feedback predicted 
performance in the younger group. In contrast, an increase in attention to error 
feedback predicted the number of WCST categories achieved by the older children. 
This pattern of findings indicates that, although trial-by-trial feedback 
monitoring is crucial for the successful detection of WCST categories in both 
younger and older children, the specifics of attention regulation differ greatly 
between children and adolescents.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00613.x
PMID: 17683350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1329. Dev Sci. 2007 Sep;10(5):625-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00604.x.

Predictive tracking over occlusions by 4-month-old infants.

von Hofsten C(1), Kochukhova O, Rosander K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Uppsala University, Sweden. 
Claes.von_Hofsten@psyk.uu.se

Two experiments investigated how 16-20-week-old infants visually tracked an 
object that oscillated on a horizontal trajectory with a centrally placed 
occluder. To determine the principles underlying infants' tendency to shift gaze 
to the exiting side before the object arrives, occluder width, oscillation 
frequency, and motion amplitude were manipulated resulting in occlusion 
durations between 0.20 and 1.66 s. Through these manipulations, we were able to 
distinguish between several possible modes of behavior underlying 'predictive' 
actions at occluders. Four such modes were tested. First, if passage-of-time 
determines when saccades are made, the tendency to shift gaze over the occluder 
is expected to be a function of time since disappearance. Second, if visual 
salience of the exiting occluder edge determines when saccades are made, 
occluder width would determine the pre-reappearance gaze shifts but not 
oscillation frequency, amplitude, or velocity. Third, if memory of the duration 
of the previous occlusion determines when the subjects shift gaze over the 
occluder, it is expected that the gaze will shift after the same latency at the 
next occlusion irrespective of whether occlusion duration is changed or not. 
Finally, if infants base their pre-reappearance gaze shifts on their ability to 
represent object motion (cognitive mode), it is expected that the latency of the 
gaze shifts over the occluder is scaled to occlusion duration. Eye and head 
movements as well as object motion were measured at 240 Hz. In 49% of the 
passages, the infants shifted gaze to the opposite side of the occluder before 
the object arrived there. The tendency to make such gaze shifts could not be 
explained by the passage of time since disappearance. Neither could it be fully 
explained in terms of visual information present during occlusion, i.e. occluder 
width. On the contrary, it was found that the latency of the pre-reappearance 
gaze shifts was determined by the time of object reappearance and that it was a 
function of all three factors manipulated. The results suggest that object 
velocity is represented during occlusion and that infants track the object 
behind the occluder in their 'mind's eye'.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00604.x
PMID: 17683347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1330. Dev Sci. 2007 Sep;10(5):588-612. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00629.x.

Modeling continuity and discontinuity in utterance length: a quantitative 
approach to changes, transitions and intra-individual variability in early 
grammatical development.

Bassano D(1), van Geert P.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire Structures Formelles du Langage, CNRS-Université Paris 8, France. 
dominique.bassano@univ-paris5.frorvangeert@inn.nl

The confluence of an anomaly such as a growth spurt or a temporary regression on 
the one hand and a temporary increase in intra-individual variability on the 
other hand, forms a strong indicator of a major transition in early language 
development. Data concern one-word (W1), two- and three-word (W2-3), and 
four-and-more-word (W4+) utterances from two French children during their second 
and third years. A dynamic growth model was fitted, based on a structure of 
supportive, conditional and competitive relationships. Using a statistical 
simulation method, we showed two striking peaks of variability in addition to a 
temporary regression or rapid growth in the proportions of W1, W2-3 and W4+ 
utterances. We argue that these phenomena show transitions corresponding to 
critical points in grammatical development, which could be indicative of the 
emergence of simple combinatorial and syntactic stages of language successively. 
Our results emphasize the relevance of time-serial data and of intra-individual 
variability in the study of developmental transitions in general.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00629.x
PMID: 17683345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1331. Dev Sci. 2007 Sep;10(5):565-75. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00619.x.

Maturation of the long-latency auditory ERP: step function changes at start and 
end of adolescence.

Bishop DV(1), Hardiman M, Uwer R, von Suchodoletz W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, UK. 
dorothy.bishop@psy.ox.ac.uk

The auditory event-related potential (ERP) is obtained by averaging electrical 
impulses recorded from the scalp in response to repeated stimuli. Previous work 
has shown large differences between children, adolescents and adults in the late 
auditory ERP, raising the possibility that analysis of waveform shape might be 
useful as an index of brain maturity. We reanalysed auditory ERPs from samples 
previously described by Albrecht, von Suchodoletz and Uwer (2000) and Uwer, 
Albrecht and von Suchodoletz (2002), using the intraclass correlation (ICC) as a 
global measure of similarity of an individual's waveform to a grand average 
comparison waveform for each age band. Three developmental periods were clearly 
distinguished: 5 to 12 years, 13 to 16 years, and adulthood. However, within 
each of these periods, there was no evidence of any developmental progression 
with age.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00619.x
PMCID: PMC2121131
PMID: 17683343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1332. Dev Sci. 2007 Sep;10(5):547-58. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00614.x.

Development of emotional facial recognition in late childhood and adolescence.

Thomas LA(1), De Bellis MD, Graham R, LaBar KS.

Author information:
(1)Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA.

The ability to interpret emotions in facial expressions is crucial for social 
functioning across the lifespan. Facial expression recognition develops rapidly 
during infancy and improves with age during the preschool years. However, the 
developmental trajectory from late childhood to adulthood is less clear. We 
tested older children, adolescents and adults on a two-alternative forced-choice 
discrimination task using morphed faces that varied in emotional content. Actors 
appeared to pose expressions that changed incrementally along three 
progressions: neutral-to-fear, neutral-to-anger, and fear-to-anger. Across all 
three morph types, adults displayed more sensitivity to subtle changes in 
emotional expression than children and adolescents. Fear morphs and 
fear-to-anger blends showed a linear developmental trajectory, whereas anger 
morphs showed a quadratic trend, increasing sharply from adolescents to adults. 
The results provide evidence for late developmental changes in emotional 
expression recognition with some specificity in the time course for distinct 
emotions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00614.x
PMID: 17683341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1333. Dev Sci. 2007 Jul;10(4):423-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00596.x.

Individuation of pairs of objects in infancy.

Leslie AM(1), Chen ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Center for Cognitive Science, Rutgers 
University, 152 Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA. 
aleslie@ruccs.rutgers.edu

Looking-time studies examined whether 11-month-old infants can individuate two 
pairs of objects using only shape information. In order to test individuation, 
the object pairs were presented sequentially. Infants were familiarized either 
with the sequential pairs, disk-triangle/disk-triangle (XY/XY), whose shapes 
differed within but not across pairs, or with the sequential pairs, 
disk-disk/triangle-triangle (XX/YY), whose shapes differed across but not within 
pairs. The XY/XY presentation looked to adults like a single pair of objects 
presented repeatedly, whereas the XX/YY presentation looked like different pairs 
of objects. Following familiarization to these displays, infants were given a 
series of test trials in which the screen was removed, revealing two pairs of 
objects in one of two outcomes, XYXY or XXYY. On the first test trial, infants 
familiarized with the identical pairs (XY/XY) apparently expected a single pair 
to be revealed because they looked longer than infants familiarized with the 
distinct pairs (XX/YY). Infants who had seen the distinct pairs apparently 
expected a double pair outcome. A second experiment showed outcomes of a single 
XY pair. This outcome is unexpected for XX/YY-familiarized infants but expected 
for XY/XY-familiarized infants, the reverse of Experiment 1. This time looking 
times were longer for XX/YY infants. Eleven-month-olds appear to be able to 
represent not just individual objects but also pairs of objects. These results 
suggest that if they can group the objects into sets, infants may be able to 
track more objects than their numerosity limit or available working memory slots 
would normally allow. We suggest possible small exact numerosity representations 
that would allow tracking of such sets.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00596.x
PMID: 17552932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1334. Dev Sci. 2007 Jul;10(4):F31-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00630.x.

Enculturated chimpanzees imitate rationally.

Buttelmann D(1), Carpenter M, Call J, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Comparative Psychology, Max Planck Institute 
for Evolutionary Anthropology, Deutscher Platz 6, D-04103 Leipzig, Germany. 
buttelmann@eva.mpg.de

Human infants imitate others' actions 'rationally': they copy a demonstrator's 
action when that action is freely chosen, but less when it is forced by some 
constraint (Gergely, Bekkering & Király, 2002). We investigated whether 
enculturated chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) also imitate rationally. Using 
Gergely and colleagues' (2002) basic procedure, a human demonstrator operated 
each of six apparatuses using an unusual body part (he pressed it with his 
forehead or foot, or sat on it). In the Hands Free condition he used this 
unusual means even though his hands were free, suggesting a free choice. In the 
Hands Occupied condition he used the unusual means only because his hands were 
occupied, suggesting a constrained or forced choice. Like human infants, 
chimpanzees imitated the modeled action more often in the Hands Free than in the 
Hands Occupied condition. Enculturated chimpanzees thus have some understanding 
of the rationality of others' intentional actions, and use this understanding 
when imitating others.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00630.x
PMID: 17552931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1335. Dev Sci. 2007 May;10(3):399-410. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00593.x.

Perception of object shape and texture in human newborns: evidence from 
cross-modal transfer tasks.

Sann C(1), Streri A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychology, Paris Descartes University, France. 
mai_anhsann@hotmail.com

The present research investigates newborn infants' perceptions of the shape and 
texture of objects through studies of the bi-directionality of cross-modal 
transfer between vision and touch. Using an intersensory procedure, four 
experiments were performed in newborns to study their ability to transfer shape 
and texture information from vision to touch and from touch to vision. The 
results showed that cross-modal transfer of shape is not bi-directional at 
birth. Newborns visually recognized a shape previously held but they failed to 
tactually recognize a shape previously seen. In contrast, a bi-directional 
cross-modal transfer of texture was observed. Taken together, the results 
suggest that newborn infants, like older children and adults, gather information 
differently in the visual and tactile modes, for different object properties. 
The findings provide evidence for continuity in the development of mechanisms 
for perceiving object properties.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00593.x
PMID: 17444979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1336. Dev Sci. 2007 May;10(3):379-98. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00544.x.

Infants' perception of goal-directed actions: development through cue-based 
bootstrapping.

Biro S(1), Leslie AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands. 
sbiro@fsw.leidenuniv.nl

It is now widely accepted that sensitivity to goal-directed actions emerges 
during the first year of life. However, controversy still surrounds the question 
of how this sensitivity emerges and develops. One set of views emphasizes the 
role of observing behavioral cues, while another emphasizes the role of 
experience with producing own action. In a series of four experiments we 
contrast these two views. In Experiment 1, it was shown that infants as young as 
6 months old can interpret an unfamiliar human action as goal-directed when the 
action involves equifinal variations. Experiments 2 and 3 demonstrated that 12- 
and 9-month-olds are also able to attribute goals to an inanimate action if it 
displays behavioral cues such as self-propelledness and an action-effect. In 
Experiment 4, we found that even 6-months-olds can encode the goal object of an 
inanimate action if all three cues, equifinality, self-propelledness and an 
action-effect, were present. These findings suggest that the ability to ascribe 
goal-directedness does not necessarily emerge from hands-on experience with 
particular actions and that it is independent from the specific appearance of 
the actor as long as sufficient behavioral cues are available. We propose a 
cue-based bootstrapping model in which an initial sensitivity to behavioral cues 
leads to learning about further cues. The further cues in turn inform about 
different kinds of goal-directed agents and about different types of actions. By 
uniting an innate base with a learning process, cue-based bootstrapping can help 
reconcile divergent views on the emergence of infants' ability to understand 
actions as goal-directed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00544.x
PMID: 17444978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1337. Dev Sci. 2007 May;10(3):333-56. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00586.x.

Using domain-general principles to explain children's causal reasoning 
abilities.

McClelland JL(1), Thompson RM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh , USA. 
jlm@psych.stanford.edu

A connectionist model of causal attribution is presented, emphasizing the use of 
domain-general principles of processing and learning previously employed in 
models of semantic cognition. The model categorizes objects dependent upon their 
observed 'causal properties' and is capable of making several types of 
inferences that 4-year-old children have been shown to be capable of. The model 
gives rise to approximate conformity to normative models of causal inference and 
gives approximate estimates of the probability that an object presented in an 
ambiguous situation actually possesses a particular causal power, based on 
background knowledge and recent observations. It accounts for data from three 
sets of experimental studies of the causal inferencing abilities of young 
children. The model provides a base for further efforts to delineate the 
intuitive mechanisms of causal inference employed by children and adults, 
without appealing to inherent principles or mechanisms specialized for causal as 
opposed to other forms of reasoning.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00586.x
PMID: 17444974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1338. Dev Sci. 2007 May;10(3):298-306. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00589.x.

Bayes nets and babies: infants' developing statistical reasoning abilities and 
their representation of causal knowledge.

Sobel DM(1), Kirkham NZ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive and Linguistic Sciences, Brown University, RI 02912, 
USA. sobel@cog.brown.edu

A fundamental assumption of the causal graphical model framework is the Markov 
assumption, which posits that learners can discriminate between two events that 
are dependent because of a direct causal relation between them and two events 
that are independent conditional on the value of another event(s). Sobel and 
Kirkham (2006) demonstrated that 8-month-old infants registered conditional 
independence information among a sequence of events; infants responded according 
to the Markov assumption in such a way that was inconsistent with models that 
rely on simple calculations of associative strength. The present experiment 
extends these findings to younger infants, and demonstrates that such responses 
potentially develop during the second half of the first year of life. These data 
are discussed in terms of a developmental trajectory between associative 
mechanisms and causal graphical models as representations of infants' causal and 
statistical learning.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00589.x
PMID: 17444971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1339. Dev Sci. 2007 Mar;10(2):266-79. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00543.x.

Impairments in monkey and human face recognition in 2-year-old toddlers with 
Autism Spectrum Disorder and Developmental Delay.

Chawarska K(1), Volkmar F.

Author information:
(1)Child Study Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, 
USA. katarzyna.chawarska@Yale.edu

Face recognition impairments are well documented in older children with Autism 
Spectrum Disorders (ASD); however, the developmental course of the deficit is 
not clear. This study investigates the progressive specialization of face 
recognition skills in children with and without ASD. Experiment 1 examines human 
and monkey face recognition in 2-year-old children with ASD, matched for 
nonverbal mental age (NVMA) with developmentally delayed (DD) children, and 
typically developing children (TD), using the Visual Paired Comparison (VPC) 
paradigm. Results indicate that, consistent with the other-species effect, TD 
controls show enhanced recognition of human but not monkey faces; however, 
neither the ASD nor the DD group show evidence of face recognition regardless of 
the species. Experiment 2 examines the same question in a group of older 3- to 
4-year-old developmentally disabled (ASD and DD) children as well as in typical 
controls. In this experiment, both human and monkey faces are recognized by all 
three groups. The results of Experiments 1 and 2 suggest that difficulties in 
face processing, as measured by the VPC paradigm, are common in toddlers with 
ASD as well as DD, but that these deficits tend to disappear by early preschool 
age. In addition, the experiments show that higher efficacy of incidental 
encoding and recognition of facial identity in a context of passive exposure is 
positively related to nonverbal cognitive skills and age, but not to overall 
social interaction skills or greater attention to faces exhibited in 
naturalistic contexts.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00543.x
PMID: 17286849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1340. Dev Sci. 2007 Mar;10(2):255-65. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00583.x.

Social grooming in the kindergarten: the emergence of flattery behavior.

Fu G(1), Lee K.

Author information:
(1)School of Education, Zhejiang Normal University, PR China.

The present study examined the emergence of flattery behavior in young children 
and factors that might affect whether and how it is displayed. Preschool 
children between the ages of 3 and 6 years were asked to rate drawings produced 
by either a present or absent adult stranger (Experiments 1 and 2), child 
stranger (Experiments 2 and 3), classmate, or the children's own teacher 
(Experiment 3). Young preschoolers gave consistent ratings to the same drawing 
by the person regardless of whether the person was absent or present. In 
contrast, many older preschoolers gave more flattering ratings to the drawing 
when the person was present than in the person's absence. Also, older 
preschoolers displayed flattery regardless of whether the recipient was an adult 
or a child. However, they displayed flattery to a greater extent towards 
familiar individuals than unfamiliar ones, demonstrating an emerging sensitivity 
to social contexts in which flattery is used. These findings suggest that 
preschoolers have already learned not to articulate bluntly their true feelings 
and thoughts about others. Rather, they are able to manipulate their 
communications according to social context.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00583.x
PMCID: PMC2597104
PMID: 17286848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1341. Dev Sci. 2007 Mar;10(2):237-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00582.x.

The role of type and token frequency in using past tense morphemes correctly.

Nicoladis E(1), Palmer A, Marentette P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Alberta, Canada. elenan@ualberta.ca

Type and token frequency have been thought to be important in the acquisition of 
past tense morphology, particularly in differentiating regular and irregular 
forms. In this study we tested the role of frequency in two ways: (1) in 
bilingual children, who typically use and hear either language less often than 
monolingual children and (2) cross-linguistically: French and English have 
different patterns of frequency of regular/irregular verbs. Ten French-English 
bilingual children, 10 French monolingual and 10 English monolingual children 
between 4 and 6 years watched a cartoon and re-told the story. The results 
demonstrated that the bilingual children were less accurate than the monolingual 
children. Their accuracy in both French and English regular and irregular verbs 
corresponded to frequency in the input language. These results are consistent 
with the hypothesis that children learn past tense morphemes by analogy with 
other words in their vocabularies. We propose a developmental sequence based on 
conservative generalization across a growing set of verbs.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00582.x
PMID: 17286847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1342. Dev Sci. 2007 Mar;10(2):205-12. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00581.x.

The informative value of emotional expressions: 'social referencing' in 
mother-child pretense.

Nishida TK(1), Lillard AS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904, 
USA. tkn4z@virginia.edu

Mothers begin to pretend with their children during the second year, when 
children still have much to learn about the real world. Although it would be 
easy to confuse what is pretend with what is real, children at this young age 
often demonstrate comprehension during pretense situations. It is plausible that 
social referencing, in which the child uses the mother's emotional expression as 
a guide to behavior, might facilitate this emerging knowledge by signaling to 
the child not to take the pretend situation seriously. Data from 32 pairs of 
mothers and their 18-month-olds who had engaged in pretend and real snack 
behaviors were subjected to a sequential analysis to investigate a social 
referencing interpretation. Consistent with our hypothesis, behaviors suggestive 
of a baby's understanding pretense were more likely to follow a specific 
combination of behaviors consistent with social referencing than other 
combinations of behaviors. These results provide support for the possibility 
that children use information obtained through social referencing to assist 
understanding during pretense interactions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00581.x
PMCID: PMC3334327
PMID: 17286845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1343. Dev Sci. 2007 Mar;10(2):172-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00547.x.

Looking compensates for the distance between mother and infant chimpanzee.

Okamoto-Barth S(1), Tanaka M, Kawai N, Tomonaga M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Graduate School of Environmental Studies, Nagoya 
University, Japan. s.barth@psychology.unimaas.nl

The development of visual interaction between mother and infant has received 
much attention in developmental psychology, not only in humans, but also in 
non-human primates. Recently, comparative developmental approaches have 
investigated whether the mechanisms that underlie these behaviors are common in 
primates. In the present study, we focused on the question of whether chimpanzee 
mother and infant replace physical contact with visual contact. To test this 
hypothesis, we measured non-synchronous looking ('looking') between mother and 
infant. A unique setting, in which the mother chimpanzee stayed in one location 
and the infant chimpanzee moved freely, allowed us to analyze the relation 
between the visual interaction and the distance of a mother-infant pair during 
the first year of life. Our results showed that 'looking' increased when body 
contact decreased or when the distance between mother and infant increased. We 
also show a behavioral sequence of typical 'secure base' behavior, a behavior 
characterized by the infant regularly returning to its mother when exploring the 
environment. These findings imply that attachment between mother and infant 
chimpanzee appears to develop in a similar fashion as in humans.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00547.x
PMID: 17286841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1344. Dev Sci. 2007 Mar;10(2):165-8; discussion 169-71. doi: 
10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00550.x.

Constructing adequate non-speech analogues: what is special about speech anyway?

Rosen S(1), Iverson P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Phonetics and Linguistics, UCL, London, UK. 
stuart@phon.ucl.ac.uk

Comment on
    Dev Sci. 2007 Mar;10(2):159-64.

Vouloumanos and Werker (2007) claim that human neonates have a (possibly innate) 
bias to listen to speech based on a preference for natural speech utterances 
over sine-wave analogues. We argue that this bias more likely arises from the 
strikingly different saliency of voice melody in the two kinds of sounds, a bias 
that has already been shown to be learned pre-natally. Possible avenues of 
research to address this crucial issue are proposed, based on a consideration of 
the distinctive acoustic properties of speech. This is a commentary on 
Vouloumanos and Werker (2007).

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00550.x
PMID: 17286839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1345. Dev Sci. 2007 Mar;10(2):159-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00549.x.

Listening to language at birth: evidence for a bias for speech in neonates.

Vouloumanos A(1), Werker JF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, McGill University, Canada. 
athena.vouloumanos@mcgill.ca

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2007 Mar;10(2):165-8; discussion 169-71.

The nature and origin of the human capacity for acquiring language is not yet 
fully understood. Here we uncover early roots of this capacity by demonstrating 
that humans are born with a preference for listening to speech. Human neonates 
adjusted their high amplitude sucking to preferentially listen to speech, 
compared with complex non-speech analogues that controlled for critical spectral 
and temporal parameters of speech. These results support the hypothesis that 
human infants begin language acquisition with a bias for listening to speech. 
The implications of these results for language and communication development are 
discussed. For a commentary on this article see Rosen and Iverson (2007).

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00549.x
PMID: 17286838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1346. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):152-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00578.x.

Interrelated and interdependent.

Diamond A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver and BC 
Children's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada. adele.diamond@ubc.ca

The possibilities for building and nourishing connections among the social, 
cultural, neuroscientific, biological, and cognitive sciences in the service of 
understanding children and their development are tremendously exciting. 
Crossing, and integrating across, disciplinary boundaries, especially those 
disciplines relating to biology/neuroscience, society/culture, cognition, 
emotion, perception, and motor function has greatly increased over the last 
decade and hopefully will increase exponentially in the future. All of these 
aspects of being human are multiply-interrelated and we need to make far more 
progress in understanding those interrelations.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00578.x
PMCID: PMC1839949
PMID: 17181714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1347. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):147-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00577.x.

Religion is natural.

Bloom P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520-8205, USA. 
paul.bloom@yale.edu

Despite its considerable intellectual interest and great social relevance, 
religion has been neglected by contemporary developmental psychologists. But in 
the last few years, there has been an emerging body of research exploring 
children's grasp of certain universal religious ideas. Some recent findings 
suggest that two foundational aspects of religious belief - belief in mind-body 
dualism, and belief in divine agents -- come naturally to young children. This 
research is briefly reviewed, and some future directions are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00577.x
PMID: 17181713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1348. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):139-46. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00576.x.

On pedagogy.

Gergely G(1), Egyed K, Király I.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Psychological Research, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, 
Budapest, Hungary. gergelyg@mtapi.hu

Humans are adapted to spontaneously transfer relevant cultural knowledge to 
conspecifics and to fast-learn the contents of such teaching through a 
human-specific social learning system called 'pedagogy' (Csibra & Gergely, 
2006). Pedagogical knowledge transfer is triggered by specific communicative 
cues (such as eye-contact, contingent reactivity, the prosodic pattern of 
'motherese', and being addressed by one's own name). Infants show special 
sensitivity to such 'ostensive' cues that signal the teacher's communicative 
intention to manifest new and relevant knowledge about a referent object. 
Pedagogy offers a novel functional perspective to interpret a variety of early 
emerging triadic communicative interactions between adults and infants about 
novel objects they are jointly attending to. The currently dominant 
interpretation of such triadic communications (mindreading) holds that infants 
interpret others' object-directed manifestations in terms of subjective mental 
states (such as emotions, dispositions, or intentions) that they attribute to 
the other person's mind. We contrast the pedagogical versus the mindreading 
account in a new study testing 14-month-olds' interpretation of others' 
object-directed emotion expressions observed in a communicative cueing context. 
We end by discussing the far-reaching implications of the pedagogical 
perspective for a wide range of early social-cognitive competences, and for 
providing new directions for future research on child development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00576.x
PMID: 17181712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1349. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):104-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00571.x.

Cognitive variability.

Siegler RS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, 
USA. rs7k@andrew.cmu.edu

Children's thinking is highly variable at every level of analysis, from neural 
and associative levels to the level of strategies, theories, and other aspects 
of high-level cognition. This variability exists within people as well as 
between them; individual children often rely on different strategies or 
representations on closely related problems presented close in time. Recognizing 
such variability can help us both describe development more accurately and 
better explain how cognitive change occurs.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00571.x
PMID: 17181707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1350. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):54-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00564.x.

Action in development.

von Hofsten C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Uppsala University, Sweden. 
claes.von_hofsten@psyk.uu.se

It is argued that cognitive development has to be understood in the functional 
perspective provided by actions. Actions reflect all aspects of cognitive 
development including the motives of the child, the problems to be solved, and 
the constraints and possibilities of the child's body and sensorimotor system. 
Actions are directed into the future and their control is based on knowledge of 
what is going to happen next. Such knowledge is available because events are 
governed by rules and regularities. The planning of actions also requires 
knowledge of the affordances of objects and events. An important aspect of 
cognitive development is about how the child acquires such knowledge.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00564.x
PMID: 17181700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1351. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):48-53. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00563.x.

What's in a look?

Aslin RN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester, 
Rochester, NY 14627, USA. aslin@cvs.rochester.edu

The most common behavioral technique used to study infant perception, cognition, 
language, and social development is some variant of looking time. Since its 
inception as a reliable method in the late 1950s, a tremendous increase in 
knowledge about infant competencies has been gained by inferences made from 
measures of looking time. Here we examine the logic, utility, and future 
prospects for further gains in our understanding of infant cognition from the 
use of looking time measures.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00563.x
PMCID: PMC2493049
PMID: 17181699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1352. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):30-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00560.x.

Endless minds most beautiful.

Finlay BL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. 
blf2@cornell.edu

The marriage of evolution and development to produce the new discipline 
'evo-devo' in biology is situated in the general history of evolutionary 
biology, and its significance for developmental cognitive science is discussed. 
The discovery and description of the highly conserved, robust and 'evolvable' 
mechanisms that organize the vertebrate body plan and fundamental physiology 
have direct implications for what we should investigate in the evolution of 
behavior and cognition.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00560.x
PMID: 17181696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1353. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):24-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00559.x.

Attention genes.

Posner MI(1), Rothbart MK, Sheese BE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA. 
mposner@uoregon.edu

A major problem for developmental science is understanding how the cognitive and 
emotional networks important in carrying out mental processes can be related to 
individual differences. The last five years have seen major advances in 
establishing links between alleles of specific genes and the neural networks 
underlying aspects of attention. These findings have the potential of 
illuminating important aspects of normal development and its pathologies. We 
need to learn how genes and experience combine to influence the structure of 
neural networks and the efficiency with which they are exercised. Methods for 
addressing these issues are central to progress in the decade ahead.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00559.x
PMID: 17181695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1354. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):19-23. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00558.x.

Microarrays.

Plomin R(1), Schalkwyk LC.

Author information:
(1)Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatry, 
London, UK. r.plomin@iop.kcl.ac.uk

Microarrays are revolutionizing genetics by making it possible to genotype 
hundreds of thousands of DNA markers and to assess the expression (RNA 
transcripts) of all of the genes in the genome. Microarrays are slides the size 
of a postage stamp that contain millions of DNA sequences to which 
single-stranded DNA or RNA can hybridize. This miniaturization requires little 
DNA or RNA and makes the method fast and inexpensive; multiple assays of each 
target make the method highly accurate. DNA microarrays with hundreds of 
thousands of DNA markers have made it possible to conduct systematic scans of 
the entire genome to identify genetic associations with complex disorders or 
dimensions likely to be influenced by many genes of small effect size. RNA 
microarrays can provide snapshots of gene expression across all of the genes in 
the genome at any time in any tissue, which has far-reaching applications such 
as structural and functional 'genetic neuroimaging' and providing a biological 
basis for understanding environmental influence.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00558.x
PMCID: PMC2776927
PMID: 17181694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1355. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):1-11. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00556.x.

Probabilistic epigenesis.

Gottlieb G(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Developmental Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, NC, USA.

The notion that phenotypic traits, including behavior, can be predetermined has 
slowly given way in biology and psychology over the last two decades. This shift 
in thinking is due in large part to the growing evidence for the fundamental 
role of developmental processes in the generation of the stability and 
variations in phenotype that researchers in developmental and evolutionary 
sciences seek to understand. Here I review the tenets of a metatheoretical model 
of development called probabilistic epigenesis (PE) and explore its implications 
for furthering our understanding of developmental and evolutionary processes. 
The PE framework emphasizes the reciprocity of influences within and between 
levels of an organism's developmental manifold (genetic activity, neural 
activity, behavior, and the physical, social, and cultural influences of the 
external environment) and the ubiquity of gene-environment interaction in the 
realization of all phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00556.x
PMID: 17181692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1356. Dev Sci. 2006 Nov;9(6):616-27. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00540.x.

Context sensitivity in children's reasoning about ability across the elementary 
school years.

Heyman GD(1), Compton BJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 
92093-0109, USA. gheyman@ucsd.edu

Children's sensitivity to context when making inferences about ability was 
investigated. In three studies, elementary school children (ages 5 to 10, total 
N = 332) were asked to reason about the relation between academic ability and 
the speed with which characters completed puzzle tasks. Participants were primed 
to interpret the characters' task completion rates with reference to either (1) 
the character's perceptions of the difficulty of the task, or (2) the 
character's level of effort on the task. Children who were primed to consider 
the perceived difficulty of the task were more likely to view ability as a 
static quality, a pattern of reasoning that included a tendency to associate 
task completion rates with ability, and to agree that not all individuals are 
capable of achieving high levels of success. These results provide evidence that 
even early elementary school children are sensitive to subtle contextual cues 
when making inferences about ability, and are consistent with the possibility 
that children make use of implicit cues available to them in their social 
environment to derive meaning from achievement situations.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00540.x
PMID: 17059459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1357. Dev Sci. 2006 Nov;9(6):574-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00535.x.

Imitation of hierarchical action structure by young children.

Whiten A(1), Flynn E, Brown K, Lee T.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Social Learning and Cognitive Evolution, School of Psychology, 
University of St Andrews, Scotland, UK. aw2@st-andrews.ac.uk

To provide the first systematic test of whether young children will 
spontaneously perceive and imitate hierarchical structure in complex actions, a 
task was devised in which a set of 16 elements can be modelled through either of 
two different, hierarchically organized strategies. Three-year-old children 
showed a strong and significant tendency to copy whichever of the two 
hierarchical approaches they witnessed an adult perform. Responses to an element 
absent in demonstrations, but present at test, showed that children did not 
merely copy the chain of events they had witnessed, but acquired hierarchically 
structured rules to which the new element was assimilated. Consistent with this 
finding, children did not copy specific sequences of actions at lower 
hierarchical levels.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00535.x
PMID: 17059454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1358. Dev Sci. 2006 Nov;9(6):557-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00533.x.

Two-year-olds grasp the intentional structure of pretense acts.

Rakoczy H(1), Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Department of 
Developmental and Comparative Psychology, Leipzig, Germany. rakoczy@eva.mpg.de

Twenty-two- and 27-month-old children were tested for their understanding of 
pretending as a specific intentional action form. Pairs of superficially similar 
behaviors - pretending to perform an action and trying to perform that action - 
were demonstrated to children. The 27-month-olds, and to some degree the 
22-month-olds, showed in their responses that they understood the intentional 
structure of both kinds of behaviors: after pretense models, they themselves 
performed appropriate inferential pretense acts, whereas after the trying models 
they properly performed the action or tried to perform it with novel means. 
These findings are discussed in the light of recent debates about children's 
developing understanding of pretense and theory of mind.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00533.x
PMID: 17059452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1359. Dev Sci. 2006 Nov;9(6):545-50. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00531.x.

The foundations of psychological understanding.

Goswami U(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Neuroscience in Education, University of Cambridge, UK. 
ucg10@cam.ac.uk

In this paper, I review some recent submissions to Developmental Science that 
advance our understanding of psychological development. More and more 
submissions to the journal explore the origins of knowledge and, for 
psychological knowledge, such origins are multiple. Here I consider the 
contribution of mechanisms such as contingency detection, gaze following and 
gaze monitoring, social referencing and joint attention to emergent 
psychological understanding. I also consider infant understanding of 
goal-directed action, and the intimate connection between language acquisition 
and psychological development. The centrality of intention-reading skills to 
both language and social cognition is highlighted.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00531.x
PMID: 17059450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1360. Dev Sci. 2006 Nov;9(6):F59-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00530.x.

The development of area discrimination and its implications for number 
representation in infancy.

Brannon EM(1), Lutz D, Cordes S.

Author information:
(1)Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA. 
brannon@duke.edu

This paper investigates the ability of infants to attend to continuous stimulus 
variables and how this capacity relates to the representation of number. We 
examined the change in area needed by 6-month-old infants to detect a difference 
in the size of a single element (Elmo face). Infants successfully discriminated 
a 1:4, 1:3 and 1:2 change in the area of the Elmo face but failed to 
discriminate a 2:3 change. In addition, the novelty preference was linearly 
related to the ratio difference between the novel and familiar area. Results 
suggest that Weber's Law holds for area discriminations in infancy and also 
reveal that at 6 months of age infants are equally sensitive to number, time and 
area.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00530.x
PMCID: PMC1661837
PMID: 17059447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1361. Dev Sci. 2006 Sep;9(5):518-29. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00519.x.

Apes' and children's understanding of cooperative and competitive motives in a 
communicative situation.

Herrmann E(1), Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany. 
eherrman@eva.mpg.de

Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and bonobos (Pan paniscus) (Study 1) and 18- and 
24-month-old human children (Study 2) participated in a novel communicative 
task. A human experimenter (E) hid food or a toy in one of two opaque containers 
before gesturing towards the reward's location in one of two ways. In the 
Informing condition, she attempted to help the subject find the hidden object by 
simply pointing to the correct container. In the Prohibiting condition, E held 
out her arm toward the correct container (palm out) and told the subject firmly 
'Don't take this one.' As in previous studies, the apes were at chance in the 
Informing condition. However, they were above chance in the new Prohibiting 
condition. Human 18-month-olds showed this same pattern of results, whereas 
24-month-olds showed the opposite pattern: they were better in the Informing 
condition than in the Prohibiting condition. In our interpretation, success in 
the Prohibiting condition requires subjects to understand E's goal toward them 
and their behavior, and then to make an inference (she would only prohibit if 
there were something good in there). Success in the Informing condition requires 
subjects to understand a cooperative communicative motive - which apparently 
apes and young infants find difficult.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00519.x
PMID: 16911454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1362. Dev Sci. 2006 Sep;9(5):505-17. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00518.x.

Young children's use of a delayed video representation to solve a retrieval 
problem pertaining to self.

Skouteris H(1), Spataro J, Lazaridis M.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychological Science, La Trobe University, Australia. 
h.skouteris@latrobe.edu.au

The experiments reported here were concerned with the development of delayed 
self-recognition. Children were videotaped playing a game and were marked 
covertly with a sticker on their forehead while doing so. The findings, of both 
a cross-sectional sample and a prospective longitudinal one, revealed that 3- 
but not 2.5-year-old children reached to remove this sticker reliably during 
video playback only after they had been trained to use the video to guide their 
search for an object that was not directly visible to the unaided eye. It 
appears that by 3 years of age children understand that their briefly delayed 
self video-representation is related to their present self. In contrast, while 
2.5-year-olds can use delayed video information to locate objects in space that 
cannot be seen by the unaided eye, they cannot use this type of information to 
locate an object that pertains to a part of self that is not directly visible, 
such as a sticker on one's hair. The findings are discussed in terms of the 
emergence of an extended sense of self.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00518.x
PMID: 16911453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1363. Dev Sci. 2006 Sep;9(5):465-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00513.x.

Eye remember you two: gaze direction modulates face recognition in a 
developmental study.

Smith AD(1), Hood BM, Hector K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Bristol, UK. 
Alastair.Smith@bristol.ac.uk

The effects of gaze direction on memory for faces were studied in children from 
three different age groups (6-7, 8-9, and 10-11 years old) using a computerized 
version of a task devised by Hood, Macrae, Cole-Davies and Dias (2003). 
Participants were presented with a sequence of faces in an encoding phase, and 
were then required to judge which faces they had previously encountered in a 
surprise two-alternative forced-choice recognition test. In one condition, 
stimulus eye gaze was either direct or deviated at the viewing phase, and eyes 
were closed at the test phase. In another condition, stimulus eyes were closed 
at the viewing phase, with either direct or deviated gaze at the test phase. 
Modulation of gaze direction affected hit rates, with participants demonstrating 
greater accuracy for direct gaze targets compared to deviated gaze targets in 
both conditions. Reaction times (RT) to correctly recognized stimuli were faster 
for direct gaze stimuli at the viewing phase, but not at the test phase. The age 
group of participants differentially affected these measures: there was a 
greater hit rate advantage for direct gaze stimuli in older children, although 
RTs were less affected by age. These findings suggest that while the 
facilitation of face recognition by gaze direction is robust across encoding and 
recognition stages, the efficiency of the process is affected by the stage at 
which gaze is modulated.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00513.x
PMID: 16911448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1364. Dev Sci. 2006 Sep;9(5):454-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00512.x.

Development of multisensory spatial integration and perception in humans.

Neil PA(1), Chee-Ruiter C, Scheier C, Lewkowicz DJ, Shimojo S.

Author information:
(1)Computation and Neural Systems Department, California Institute of 
Technology, USA. gwenhyvhar@earthlink.net

Previous studies have shown that adults respond faster and more reliably to 
bimodal compared to unimodal localization cues. The current study investigated 
for the first time the development of audiovisual (A-V) integration in spatial 
localization behavior in infants between 1 and 10 months of age. We observed 
infants' head and eye movements in response to auditory, visual, or both kinds 
of stimuli presented either 25 degrees or 45 degrees to the right or left of 
midline. Infants under 8 months of age intermittently showed response latencies 
significantly faster toward audiovisual targets than toward either auditory or 
visual targets alone They did so, however, without exhibiting a reliable 
violation of the Race Model, suggesting that probability summation alone could 
explain the faster bimodal response. In contrast, infants between 8 and 10 
months of age exhibited bimodal response latencies significantly faster than 
unimodal latencies for both eccentricity conditions and their latencies violated 
the Race Model at 25 degrees eccentricity. In addition to this main finding, we 
found age-dependent eccentricity and modality effects on response latencies. 
Together, these findings suggest that audiovisual integration emerges late in 
the first year of life and are consistent with neurophysiological findings from 
multisensory sites in the superior colliculus of infant monkeys showing that 
multisensory enhancement of responsiveness is not present at birth but emerges 
later in life.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00512.x
PMID: 16911447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1365. Dev Sci. 2006 Sep;9(5):F50-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00521.x.

Interrupting infants' persisting object representations: an object-based limit?

Cheries EW(1), Wynn K, Scholl BJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, CT 06520-8205, USA. 
Erik.Cheries@yale.edu

Making sense of the visual world requires keeping track of objects as the same 
persisting individuals over time and occlusion. Here we implement a new paradigm 
using 10-month-old infants to explore the processes and representations that 
support this ability in two ways. First, we demonstrate that persisting object 
representations can be maintained over brief interruptions from additional 
independent events - just as a memory of a traffic scene may be maintained 
through a brief glance in the rearview mirror. Second, we demonstrate that this 
ability is nevertheless subject to an object-based limit: if an interrupting 
event involves enough objects (carefully controlling for overall salience), then 
it will impair the maintenance of other persisting object representations even 
though it is an independent event. These experiments demonstrate how object 
representations can be studied via their 'interruptibility', and the results are 
consistent with the idea that infants' persisting object representations are 
constructed and maintained by capacity-limited mid-level 'object-files'.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00521.x
PMID: 16911437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1366. Dev Sci. 2006 Jul;9(4):411-27. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00507.x.

Hypoxic adaptation during development: relation to pattern of neurological 
presentation and cognitive disability.

Kirkham FJ(1), Datta AK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Health, Southampton University Hospitals NHS Trust, 
Southampton, UK. fk@soton.ac.uk

Children with acute hypoxic-ischaemic events (e.g. stroke) and chronic 
neurological conditions associated with hypoxia frequently present to paediatric 
neurologists. Failure to adapt to hypoxia may be a common pathophysiological 
pathway linking a number of other conditions of childhood with cognitive 
deficit. There is evidence that congenital cardiac disease, asthma and sleep 
disordered breathing, for example, are associated with cognitive deficit, but 
little is known about the mechanism and whether there is any structural change. 
This review describes what is known about how the brain reacts and adapts to 
hypoxia, focusing on epilepsy and sickle cell disease (SCD). We prospectively 
recorded overnight oxyhaemoglobin saturation (SpO2) in 18 children with 
intractable epilepsy, six of whom were currently or recently in minor status 
(MS). Children with MS were more likely to have an abnormal sleep study defined 
as either mean baseline SpO2 <94% or >4 dips of >4% in SpO2/hour (p = .04). In 
our series of prospectively followed patients with SCD who subsequently 
developed acute neurological symptoms and signs, mean overnight SpO2 was lower 
in those with cerebrovascular disease on magnetic resonance angiography 
(Mann-Whitney, p = .01). Acute, intermittent and chronic hypoxia may have 
detrimental effects on the brain, the clinical manifestations perhaps depending 
on rapidity of presentation and prior exposure.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00507.x
PMCID: PMC1931424
PMID: 16764614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1367. Dev Sci. 2006 Jul;9(4):350-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00499.x.

Brain and cognitive-behavioural development after asphyxia at term birth.

de Haan M(1), Wyatt JS, Roth S, Vargha-Khadem F, Gadian D, Mishkin M.

Author information:
(1)Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience Unit, University College London, 
Institute of Child Health, UK. m.de-haan@ich.ucl.ac.uk

Perinatal asphyxia occurs in approximately 1-6 per 1000 live full-term births. 
Different patterns of brain damage can result, though the relation of these 
patterns to long-term cognitive-behavioural outcome remains under investigation. 
The hippocampus is one brain region that can be damaged (typically not in 
isolation), and this site of damage has been implicated in two different 
long-term outcomes, cognitive memory impairment and the psychiatric disorder 
schizophrenia. Factors in addition to the acute episode of asphyxia likely 
contribute to these specific outcomes, making prediction difficult. Future 
studies that better document long-term cognitive-behavioural outcome, 
quantitatively identify patterns of brain injury over development and consider 
additional variables that may modulate the impact of asphyxia on cognitive and 
behavioural function will forward the goals of predicting long-term outcome and 
understanding the mechanisms by which it unfolds.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00499.x
PMID: 16764608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1368. Dev Sci. 2006 Jul;9(4):338-49. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00498.x.

The effect of prenatal hypoxia on brain development: short- and long-term 
consequences demonstrated in rodent models.

Golan H(1), Huleihel M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Molecular Genetics and Zlotowski Center for 
Neuroscience, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, 
Beer-Sheva, Israel. havag@bgu.ac.il

Hypoxia (H) and hypoxia-ischemia (HI) are major causes of foetal brain damage 
with long-lasting behavioral implications. The effect of hypoxia has been widely 
studied in human and a variety of animal models. In the present review, we 
summarize the latest studies testing the behavioral outcomes following prenatal 
hypoxia/hypoxia-ischemia in rodent models. Delayed development of sensory and 
motor reflexes during the first postnatal month of rodent life was observed by 
various groups. Impairment of motor function, learning and memory was evident in 
the adult animals. Activation of the signaling leading to cell death was 
detected as early as three hours following H/HI. An increase in the counts of 
apoptotic cells appeared approximately three days after the insult and peaked 
about seven days later. Around 14-20 days following the H/HI, the amount of cell 
death observed in the tissue returned to its basal levels and cell loss was 
apparent in the brain tissue. The study of the molecular mechanism leading to 
brain damage in animal models following prenatal hypoxia adds valuable insight 
to our knowledge of the central events that account for the morphological and 
functional outcomes. This understanding provides the starting point for the 
development and improvement of efficient treatment and intervention strategies.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00498.x
PMID: 16764607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1369. Dev Sci. 2006 May;9(3):237-55; discussion 265-9. doi: 
10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00483.x.

The role of sensorimotor impairments in dyslexia: a multiple case study of 
dyslexic children.

White S(1), Milne E, Rosen S, Hansen P, Swettenham J, Frith U, Ramus F.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, UK. 
s.white@ucl.ac.uk

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2006 May;9(3):256-7; discussion 265-9.
    Dev Sci. 2006 May;9(3):257-9; discussion 265-9.
    Dev Sci. 2006 May;9(3):259-62; discussion 265-9.
    Dev Sci. 2006 May;9(3):262-4; discussion 265-9.

This study attempts to investigate the role of sensorimotor impairments in the 
reading disability that characterizes dyslexia. Twenty-three children with 
dyslexia were compared to 22 control children, matched for age and non-verbal 
intelligence, on tasks assessing literacy as well as phonological, visual, 
auditory and motor abilities. The dyslexic group as a whole were significantly 
impaired on phonological, but not sensorimotor, tasks. Analysis of individual 
data suggests that the most common impairments were on phonological and visual 
stress tasks and the vast majority of dyslexics had one of these two 
impairments. Furthermore, phonological skill was able to account for variation 
in literacy skill, to the exclusion of all sensorimotor factors, while neither 
auditory nor motor skill predicted any variance in phonological skill. Visual 
stress seems to account for a small proportion of dyslexics, independently of 
the commonly reported phonological deficit. However, there is little evidence 
for a causal role of auditory, motor or other visual impairments.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00483.x
PMID: 16669791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1370. Dev Sci. 2006 Mar;9(2):182-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00478.x.

Change in children's understanding of others' intentional actions.

Bellagamba F(1), Camaioni L, Colonnesi C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Social Psychology, University of Rome 'La 
Sapienza', Italy. francesca.bellagamba@uniroma1.it

The study investigated children's intention understanding using a longitudinal 
design. Thirty-two Italian children were tested on the 'Demonstration of 
Intention' in the Re-enactment paradigm devised by Meltzoff (1995a), at two 
ages. Mean age was 12 months at the first session and 15 months at the second 
session. Previous research by Meltzoff showed that 18-month-olds are able to 
re-enact what the adult intended to do, when an adult tried but failed to 
perform certain target acts. Bellagamba and Tomasello (1999) found that, 
compared to 18-month-olds, 12-month-olds are less able to imitate unsuccessful 
goal-directed actions. The current study had two main goals. The first was to 
replicate earlier findings on intention understanding in 12- and 15-month-olds 
longitudinally assessed. The second goal was to analyse which actions children 
perform when not producing the target act. A coding scheme was devised to 
evaluate these non-target actions. Results confirmed previous findings, i.e. 
children's tendency to produce the target act was higher at an older age. At a 
younger age the most frequent response was 'undifferentiated manipulation' of 
target objects, followed by 'approximation to the target action'. Since children 
differed in their intention understanding performance at the first session, we 
decided to check whether these individual differences remained stable at the 
second session. Individual children with high intention understanding 
performance at 12 months tended to remain high at 15 months of age.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00478.x
PMID: 16472319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1371. Dev Sci. 2006 Mar;9(2):F22-F31. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00469.x.

Birthweight-discordance and differences in early parenting relate to monozygotic 
twin differences in behaviour problems and academic achievement at age 7.

Asbury K(1), Dunn JF, Plomin R.

Author information:
(1)SGDP Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, UK. 
spjgkaa@iop.kcl.ac.uk

This longitudinal monozygotic (MZ) twin differences study explored associations 
between birthweight and early family environment and teacher-rated behaviour 
problems and academic achievement at age 7. MZ differences in anxiety, 
hyperactivity, conduct problems, peer problems and academic achievement 
correlated significantly with MZ differences in birthweight and early family 
environment, showing effect sizes of up to 2%. As predicted by earlier research, 
associations increased at the extremes of discordance, even in a longitudinal, 
cross-rater design, with effect sizes reaching as high as 12%. As with previous 
research some of these non-shared environmental (NSE) relationships appeared to 
operate partly as a function of SES, family chaos and maternal depression. 
Higher-risk families generally showed stronger negative associations.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00469.x
PMID: 16472310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1372. Dev Sci. 2006 Jan;9(1):51-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00463.x.

Event-related potential (ERP) indices of infants' recognition of familiar and 
unfamiliar objects in two and three dimensions.

Carver LJ(1), Meltzoff AN, Dawson G.

Author information:
(1)Center on Human Development and Disability, University of Washington, USA. 
ljcarver@ucsd.edu

We measured infants' recognition of familiar and unfamiliar 3-D objects and 
their 2-D representations using event-related potentials (ERPs). Infants 
differentiated familiar from unfamiliar objects when viewing them in both two 
and three dimensions. However, differentiation between the familiar and novel 
objects occurred more quickly when infants viewed the object in 3-D than when 
they viewed 2-D representations. The results are discussed with respect to 
infants' recognition abilities and their understanding of real objects and 
representations. This is the first study using 3-D objects in conjunction with 
ERPs in infants, and it introduces an interesting new methodology for assessing 
infants' electrophysiological responses to real objects.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00463.x
PMCID: PMC1475557
PMID: 16445396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1373. Dev Sci. 2006 Jan;9(1):33-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00460.x.

Toddler subtraction with large sets: further evidence for an analog-magnitude 
representation of number.

Slaughter V(1), Kamppi D, Paynter J.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Queensland, Australia. vps@psy.uq.edu.au

Two experiments were conducted to test the hypothesis that toddlers have access 
to an analog-magnitude number representation that supports numerical reasoning 
about relatively large numbers. Three-year-olds were presented with subtraction 
problems in which initial set size and proportions subtracted were 
systematically varied. Two sets of cookies were presented and then covered. The 
experimenter visibly subtracted cookies from the hidden sets, and the children 
were asked to choose which of the resulting sets had more. In Experiment 1, 
performance was above chance when high proportions of objects (3 versus 6) were 
subtracted from large sets (of 9) and for the subset of older participants 
(older than 3 years, 5 months; n = 15), performance was also above chance when 
high proportions (10 versus 20) were subtracted from the very large sets (of 
30). In Experiment 2, which was conducted exclusively with older 3-year-olds and 
incorporated an important methodological control, the pattern of results for the 
subtraction tasks was replicated. In both experiments, success on the tasks was 
not related to counting ability. The results of these experiments support the 
hypothesis that young children have access to an analog-magnitude system for 
representing large approximate quantities, as performance on these subtraction 
tasks showed a Weber's Law signature, and was independent of conventional number 
knowledge.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00460.x
PMID: 16445393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1374. Dev Sci. 2005 Nov;8(6):595-604. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00451.x.

Ambiguous benefits: the effect of bilingualism on reversing ambiguous figures.

Bialystok E(1), Shapero D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 
ellenb@yorku.ca

Two studies are reported in which monolingual and bilingual children, 
approximately 6 years old, attempted to identify the alternative image in a 
reversible figure. In both studies, bilingual children were more successful than 
monolinguals in seeing the other meaning in the images. In the first study, 
there was no relation between the ability to reverse the interpretation and 
performance on the children's embedded figures task, a task that superficially 
appeared to involve similar processes. The second study replicated this finding 
but showed that performance was strongly related to success in the post-switch 
phase of the dimensional change card sort task. In both cases, the meaning of an 
image must be reassigned, and bilinguals were better in both these tasks.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00451.x
PMID: 16246250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1375. Dev Sci. 2005 Nov;8(6):544-50. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00446.x.

Beyond the distributional input? A developmental investigation of asymmetry in 
infants' categorization of cats and dogs.

Furrer SD(1), Younger BA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 
47907-2081, USA.

Two experiments are reported using a visual familiarization categorization 
procedure. In both experiments, infants were familiarized with sets of stimuli 
previously shown to contain asymmetric feature distributions that support an 
asymmetry in young infants' categorization of cats and dogs (i.e. infants' cat 
category excludes dogs but their dog category includes cats). In Experiment 1, 
the asymmetry was replicated in 4-month-old infants. In contrast, 10-month-old 
infants demonstrated exclusive category representations for both cats and dogs. 
In Experiment 2, an additional group of 10-month-olds demonstrated exclusive 
representations for both cats and dogs under conditions of very limited 
within-task category familiarization. Potential mechanisms underlying the shift 
from an asymmetric to a symmetric pattern of categorization in the first year 
are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00446.x
PMID: 16246246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1376. Dev Sci. 2005 Nov;8(6):525-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00444.x.

Maturation of action monitoring from adolescence to adulthood: an ERP study.

Hogan AM(1), Vargha-Khadem F, Kirkham FJ, Baldeweg T.

Author information:
(1)Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience Unit, Institute of Child Health, 
University College London, UK. a.hogan@soton.ac.uk

This study investigated the development of the frontal lobe action-monitoring 
system from late childhood and adolescence to early adulthood using ERP markers 
of error processing. Error negativity (ERN) and correct response negativity 
(CRN) potentials were recorded while adolescents and adults (aged 12-22 years, n 
= 23) performed two forced-choice visual reaction time tasks of differing 
complexity. Significant age differences were seen for behavioural and ERP 
responses to complex (infrequent, incompatible) trials: adolescents elicited an 
error negativity of reduced magnitude compared with adults. Furthermore, in 
contrast to adults, adolescents showed a non-significant differentiation between 
response-locked ERP components elicited by correct (CRN) and error responses 
(ERN). Behaviourally, adolescents corrected fewer errors in incompatible trials, 
and with increasing age there was greater post-error slowing. In conclusion, the 
neural systems underlying action-monitoring continue to mature throughout the 
second decade of life, and are associated with increased efficiency for fast 
error detection and correction during complex tasks.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00444.x
PMID: 16246244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1377. Dev Sci. 2005 Nov;8(6):519-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00443.x.

How do parents respond to children's questions about the identity of artifacts?

Nelson DG(1), O'Neil K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Swarthmore College, PA 19081-1390, USA. 
dkemler1@swarthmore.edu

We investigated how parents respond to young children's questions about the 
identity of artifacts. Children's questions were predominantly ambiguous about 
whether they were inquiring about name or function, but when their questions 
were more specific, they were almost always about function. For unfamiliar 
objects, parents responded with functional information the majority of the time, 
alone or in addition to names. For atypical members of familiar categories, 
adults usually responded only with the category name. The results indicate that 
adults adjust their responses in a way that often provides the information about 
object kind, specifically functional information in the case of artifacts, that 
they believe their children are lacking. Such input may contribute to the 
development of children's concepts and word meanings.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00443.x
PMID: 16246243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1378. Dev Sci. 2005 Nov;8(6):492-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00440.x.

One-year-olds comprehend the communicative intentions behind gestures in a 
hiding game.

Behne T(1), Carpenter M, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany. 
behne@eva.mpg.de

This study explored infants' ability to infer communicative intent as expressed 
in non-linguistic gestures. Sixty children aged 14, 18 and 24 months 
participated. In the context of a hiding game, an adult indicated for the child 
the location of a hidden toy by giving a communicative cue: either pointing or 
ostensive gazing toward the container containing the toy. To succeed in this 
task children had to do more than just follow the point or gaze to the target 
container. They also had to infer that the adult's behaviour was relevant to the 
situation at hand - she wanted to inform them that the toy was inside the 
container toward which she gestured. Children at all three ages successfully 
used both types of cues. We conclude that infants as young as 14 months of age 
can, in some situations, interpret an adult behaviour as a relevant 
communicative act done for them.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00440.x
PMID: 16246240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1379. Dev Sci. 2005 Nov;8(6):472-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00438.x.

Young children's rapid learning about artifacts.

Casler K(1), Kelemen D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Boston University, MA 02215, USA. 
krista.casler@fandm.edu

Tool use is central to interdisciplinary debates about the evolution and 
distinctiveness of human intelligence, yet little is actually known about how 
human conceptions of artifacts develop. Results across these two studies show 
that even 2-year-olds approach artifacts in ways distinct from captive 
tool-using monkeys. Contrary to adult intuition, children do not treat all 
objects with appropriate properties as equally good means to an end. Instead, 
they use social information to rapidly form enduring artifact categories. After 
only one exposure to an artifact's functional use, children will construe the 
tool as 'for' that particular purpose and, furthermore, avoid using it for 
another feasible purpose. This teleo-functional tendency to categorize tools by 
intentional use represents a precursor to the design stance - the adult-like 
tendency to understand objects in terms of intended function - and provides an 
early foundation for apparently distinctive human abilities in efficient 
long-term tool use and design.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00438.x
PMID: 16246238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1380. Dev Sci. 2005 Sep;8(5):424-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00431.x.

Toddlers recognize verbs in novel situations and sentences.

Naigles LR(1), Bavin EL, Smith MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut 06269-1020, USA. 
letitia.naigles@uconn.edu

Toddlers' (MA=22 and 27 months) ability to extend newly taught verbs to new 
situational and sentential contexts was investigated. Children were 
interactively taught two novel verbs, presented in only the transitive frame 
(e.g. You're lorping the ball), in a playroom setting. They then viewed the verb 
actions presented on side-by-side monitors and were asked to distinguish the 
verbs in three test frames (transitive, intransitive, neutral (e.g. lorping)). 
Both groups demonstrated learning of the verbs in the new situation and 
generalized the verbs to the intransitive sentence frame, but neither 
generalized reliably to the neutral frame. We conclude that even 22-month-olds 
demonstrate considerable context independence in their verb representations.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00431.x
PMID: 16048515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1381. Dev Sci. 2005 Jul;8(4):319-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00419.x.

Evidence for an age-independent process in category learning.

Livingston KR(1), Andrews JK.

Author information:
(1)Vassar College, 124 Raymond Avenue, Poughkeepsie, NY 12604, USA. 
livingst@vassar.edu

After learning to categorize a set of alien-like stimuli in the context of a 
story, a group of 5-year-old children and adults judged pairs of stimuli from 
different categories to be less similar than did groups not learning the 
category distinction. In a same-different task, the learning group made more 
errors on pairs of non-identical stimuli from the same category than did the 
other groups, suggesting increased within-category item similarity, or 
compression. These expansion and compression effects add further support to the 
view that concept formation involves systematic changes in the metric of 
similarity space within which objects are represented. They also suggest that 
these processes do not vary with age, which is at least consistent with the 
hypothesis that they are fundamental to the mechanisms underlying concept 
formation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00419.x
PMID: 15985065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1382. Dev Sci. 2005 May;8(3):279-98. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00415.x.

Forming a stable memory representation in the first year of life: why imitation 
is more than child's play.

Lukowski AF(1), Wiebe SA, Haight JC, DeBoer T, Nelson CA, Bauer PJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Child Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 
55455-0345, USA.

Although 9-month-old infants are capable of retaining temporally ordered 
information over long delays, this ability is relatively fragile. It may be 
possible to facilitate long-term retention by allowing infants to imitate event 
sequences immediately after their presentation. The effects of imitation on 
immediate and delayed recognition and on long-term recall were investigated 
using event-related potentials (ERPs) and elicited imitation, respectively. 
Mnemonic facilitation resulting from the opportunity to imitate was apparent 
using both assessments. ERP assessments at immediate and delayed recognition 
tests suggested that infants who were allowed to imitate had stronger memory 
representations of familiar stimuli relative to infants who only viewed the 
presentation of the events. In addition, infants who were allowed to imitate 
evidenced higher levels of ordered recall after 1 month relative to infants who 
only watched the experimenter's demonstration. Therefore, imitation proved to 
have beneficial effects on explicit memory in 9(1/2)-month-olds, providing 
evidence of its effectiveness as a tool to augment mnemonic capabilities in 
infancy.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00415.x
PMID: 15819758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1383. Dev Sci. 2005 May;8(3):240-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00413.x.

Can chimpanzee infants (Pan troglodytes) form categorical representations in the 
same manner as human infants (Homo sapiens)?

Murai C(1), Kosugi D, Tomonaga M, Tanaka M, Matsuzawa T, Itakura S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Graduate School of Letters, Kyoto University, 
Japan. cmurai@bun.kyoto-u.ac.jp

We directly compared chimpanzee infants and human infants for categorical 
representations of three global-like categories (mammals, furniture and 
vehicles), using the familiarization-novelty preference technique. Neither 
species received any training during the experiments. We used the time that 
participants spent looking at the stimulus object while touching it as a 
measure. During the familiarization phase, participants were presented with four 
familiarization objects from one of three categories (e.g. mammals). Then, they 
were tested with a pair of novel objects, one was a familiar-category object and 
another was a novel-category object (e.g. vehicle) in the test phase. The 
chimpanzee infants did not show significant habituation, whereas human infants 
did. However, most important, both species showed significant novelty-preference 
in the test phase. This indicates that not only human infants, but also 
chimpanzee infants formed categorical representations of a global-like level. 
Implications for the shared origins and species-specificity of categorization 
abilities, and the cognitive operations underlying categorization, are 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00413.x
PMID: 15819756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1384. Dev Sci. 2005 May;8(3):218-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00410.x.

Processing demands in belief-desire reasoning: inhibition or general difficulty?

Friedman O(1), Leslie AM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Cognitive Science, Rutgers University, NJ 08854, USA. 
ori@ruccs.rutgers.edu

Most 4-year-olds can predict the behavior of a person who wants an object but is 
mistaken about its location. More difficult is predicting behavior when the 
person is mistaken about location and wants to avoid the object. We tested 
between two explanations for children's difficulties with avoidance false 
belief: the Selection Processing model of inhibitory processing and a General 
Difficulty account. Children were presented with a false belief task and a 
control task, in which belief attribution was as difficult as in the false 
belief task. Predicting behavior in light of the character's desire to avoid the 
object added more difficulty in the false belief task. This finding is 
consistent with the Selection Processing model, but not with the General 
Difficulty account.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00410.x
PMID: 15819753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1385. Dev Sci. 2005 May;8(3):211-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00409.x.

Doublet challenge: form comes before function in children's understanding of 
their orthography.

Lehtonen A(1), Bryant P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, UK. 
annukka.lehtonen@psychiatry.ox.ac.uk

Several current spelling models suggest that children cannot have any knowledge 
of orthographic form before they have acquired knowledge about orthographic 
function. We evaluated this proposition by using an orthographic choice task to 
inspect Finnish schoolchildren's knowledge of two aspects of consonant doublet 
use: the allowed doublet position (an aspect of orthographic form) and the type 
of phonemic information they represent (an aspect of orthographic function). The 
results challenged the view of the existing spelling models, since they showed 
that already at the beginning of the first school year children possessed formal 
knowledge of doublet use and knew that word-initial doublets are not allowed. 
However, these children were ignorant of the function of doublets, i.e. that 
they stand for long consonants.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00409.x
PMID: 15819752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1386. Dev Sci. 2005 Mar;8(2):122-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00399.x.

The control of responsiveness in ADHD by catecholamines: evidence for 
dopaminergic, noradrenergic and interactive roles.

Oades RD(1), Sadile AG, Sagvolden T, Viggiano D, Zuddas A, Devoto P, Aase H, 
Johansen EB, Ruocco LA, Russell VA.

Author information:
(1)Clinic for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, University of Duisburg-Essen, 
Germany. oades@uni-essen.de

We explore the neurobiological bases of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD) from the viewpoint of the neurochemistry and psychopharmacology of the 
catecholamine-based behavioural systems. The contributions of dopamine (DA) and 
noradrenaline (NA) neurotransmission to the motor and cognitive symptoms of ADHD 
(e.g. hyperactivity, variable and impulsive responses) are studied in rodent and 
primate models. These models represent elements of the behavioural units 
observed in subjects with ADHD clinically, or in laboratory settings (e.g. 
locomotion, changed sensitivity/responsivity to novelty/reinforcement and 
measures of executive processing). In particular, the models selected emphasize 
traits that are strongly influenced by mesocorticolimbic DA in the spontaneously 
hypertensive (SHR) and the Naples high excitability (NHE) rat lines. In this 
context, the mode of action of methylphenidate treatment is discussed. We also 
describe current views on the altered control by mesolimbic catecholamines of 
appropriate and inappropriate goal-directed behaviour, and the tolerance or 
intolerance of delayed reinforcement in ADHD children and animal models. Recent 
insights into the previously underestimated role of the NA system in the control 
of mesocortical DA function, and the frontal role in processing information are 
elaborated.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00399.x
PMID: 15720370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1387. Dev Sci. 2005 Jan;8(1):44-56. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00392.x.

Disentangling dimensions in the dimensional change card-sorting task.

Kloo D(1), Perner J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunnerstr. 34, A-5020 
Salzburg, Austria.

The dimensional change card-sorting task (DCCS task) is frequently used to 
assess young children's executive abilities. However, the source of children's 
difficulty with this task is still under debate. In the standard DCCS task, 
children have to sort, for example, test cards with a red cherry or a blue 
banana into two boxes marked with target cards showing a blue cherry and a red 
banana. Typically, 3-year-olds have severe problems switching from sorting by 
one dimension (e.g. color) to sorting by the other dimension (e.g. shape). Three 
experiments with 3- to 4-year-olds showed that separating the two dimensions as 
properties of a single object, and having them characterize two different 
objects (e.g. by displaying an outline of a cherry next to a red filled circle 
on the card) improves performance considerably. Results are discussed in 
relation to a number of alternative explanations for 3-year-olds' difficulty 
with the DCCS task.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00392.x
PMID: 15647066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1388. Dev Sci. 2005 Jan;8(1):8-15. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00388.x.

Young children's use of range-of-reference information in word learning.

Hall DG(1), Bélanger J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, 2136 West Mall, 
Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z4, Canada. geoff@psych.ubc.ca

An important source of information about a new word's meaning (and its 
associated lexical class) is its range of reference: the number of objects to 
which it is extended. Ninety toddlers (mean age = 37 months) participated in a 
study to determine whether young children can use this information in word 
learning. When a novel word was presented with unambiguous lexical class cues as 
either a proper name (i.e. 'His name is DAXY') or an adjective (i.e. 'He is very 
DAXY'), toddlers interpreted it appropriately, regardless of whether it was 
applied to one or both members of a pair of identical-looking stuffed animals. 
They restricted a proper name to the designated animal(s); but they generalized 
an adjective from the labeled animal(s) to a new animal bearing the same 
property. However, when the word was presented with no specific lexical class 
cues (i.e. 'DAXY'), toddlers made significantly different interpretations, 
depending on the number of referents. When the word was applied to one animal, 
they restricted it to that animal (consistent with a proper name 
interpretation); when the word was applied to two animals, they generalized it 
to a new animal with the property (consistent with an adjective or a restricted 
count noun interpretation). Range-of-reference information thus provided 
toddlers with a default cue to the meaning (and associated lexical class) of a 
novel word.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00388.x
PMID: 15647062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1389. Dev Sci. 2004 Nov;7(5):534-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00377.x.

Early development of subcortical regions involved in non-cued attention 
switching.

Casey BJ(1), Davidson MC, Hara Y, Thomas KM, Martinez A, Galvan A, Halperin JM, 
Rodríguez-Aranda CE, Tottenham N.

Author information:
(1)Sackler Institute, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY 
10021, USA. bjc2002@med.cornell.edu

This study examined the cognitive and neural development of attention switching 
using a simple forced-choice attention task and functional magnetic resonance 
imaging Fourteen children and adults made discriminations among stimuli based on 
either shape or color. Performance on these trials was compared to performance 
during blocked trials requiring all color or all shape discriminations. Magnetic 
resonance echo planar images were acquired during performance of the task. Both 
children and adults showed robust bilateral activity of the caudate nucleus when 
switching attention between color and shape discriminations that correlated 
negatively with mean response latency on these trials. However, neither 
switching costs nor caudate activity correlated with age, suggesting early 
development of the underlying neural circuitry involved in switching between 
salient stimulus sets. Overall, children and adults differed in performance and 
patterns of brain activity on the task, with adults responding more accurately 
and faster than children, and recruiting more prefrontal and parietal regions. 
These results suggest an important role of subcortical regions (i.e. caudate 
nucleus) in non-cued attention switching, with increasing recruitment of 
cortical regions with age.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00377.x
PMID: 15603286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1390. Dev Sci. 2004 Nov;7(5):527-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00376.x.

Development of flexible visual recognition memory in human infants.

Robinson AJ(1), Pascalis O.

Author information:
(1)University of Sheffield, Western Bank, UK.

Research using the visual paired comparison task has shown that visual 
recognition memory across changing contexts is dependent on the integrity of the 
hippocampal formation in human adults and in monkeys. The acquisition of 
contextual flexibility may contribute to the change in memory performance that 
occurs late in the first year of life. To assess this skill, the images are 
presented on a background of one colour during familiarization and on a 
different coloured background during the recognition test. Our research showed 
that recognition memory is impaired by a change in context at 6 and 12 months of 
age but is unaffected at 18 and 24 months of age. The findings are discussed in 
relation to hippocampal development and the proposed developmental step in 
memory at 9-10 months of age.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00376.x
PMID: 15603285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1391. Dev Sci. 2004 Jun;7(3):283-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00347.x.

Infant social attention predicts preschool social cognition.

Wellman HM(1), Phillips AT, Dunphy-Lelii S, LaLonde N.

Author information:
(1)Center for Human Growth and Development, and Department of Psychology, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 48109-0406, USA. hmw@umich.edu

Recent research examining infants' understanding of intentional action claims to 
be studying the early origins or precursors of children's later theories of mind 
If these infant understandings are continuous with later preschool achievements, 
there should be empirical connections between the two. We provide initial 
evidence that infants' social attention predicts later social cognition. 
Specifically, 14-month-olds' habituation to human intentional action 
significantly predicts later preschool mentalistic construal of persons, as 
measured on a Theory of Mind Scale.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00347.x
PMID: 15595369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1392. Dev Sci. 2004 Jun;7(3):277-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00346.x.

Young children who abandon error behaviourally still have to free themselves 
mentally: a retrospective test for inhibition in intuitive physics.

Freeman NH(1), Hood BM, Meehan C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Bristol, UK. 
n.freeman@bristol.ac.uk

When preschoolers overcome persistent error, subsequent patterns of correct 
choices may identify how the error had been overcome. Children who no longer 
misrepresented a ball rolling down a bent tube as though it could only fall 
vertically, were asked sometimes to approach and sometimes to avoid where the 
ball landed. All children showed requisite task-switching flexibility. The 
pattern of 4-year-olds' correct choices among different places showed 
unnecessary avoidance of any place that would previously have tempted them into 
a vertical-approach error, 5-year-olds rebounded into a reversal, and 
7-year-olds were flexible. The data attest to an inhibition mechanism, ruling 
out competing possibilities.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00346.x
PMID: 15595368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1393. Dev Sci. 2004 Jun;7(3):261-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00344.x.

Is visual reference necessary? Contributions of facial versus vocal cues in 
12-month-olds' social referencing behavior.

Vaish A(1), Striano T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cultural Ontogeny, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, Germany.

To examine the influences of facial versus vocal cues on infants' behavior in a 
potentially threatening situation, 12-month-olds on a visual cliff received 
positive facial-only, vocal-only, or both facial and vocal cues from mothers. 
Infants' crossing times and looks to mother were assessed. Infants crossed the 
cliff faster with multimodal and vocal than with facial cues, and looked more to 
mother in the Face Plus Voice compared to the Voice Only condition. The findings 
suggest that vocal cues, even without a visual reference, are more potent than 
facial cues in guiding infants' behavior. The discussion focuses on the meaning 
of infants' looks and the role of voice in development of social cognition.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00344.x
PMID: 15595366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1394. Dev Sci. 2004 Sep;7(4):488-98. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00368.x.

'Unwilling' versus 'unable': chimpanzees' understanding of human intentional 
action.

Call J(1), Hare B, Carpenter M, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany. 
call@eva.mpg.de

Understanding the intentional actions of others is a fundamental part of human 
social cognition and behavior. An important question is therefore whether other 
animal species, especially our nearest relatives the chimpanzees, also 
understand the intentional actions of others. Here we show that chimpanzees 
spontaneously (without training) behave differently depending on whether a human 
is unwilling or unable to give them food Chimpanzees produced more behaviors and 
left the testing station earlier with an unwilling compared to an unable (but 
willing) experimenter These data together with other recent studies on 
chimpanzees' knowledge about others' visual perception show that chimpanzees 
know more about the intentional actions and perceptions of others than 
previously demonstrated

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00368.x
PMID: 15484596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1395. Dev Sci. 2004 Sep;7(4):437-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00364.x.

Imitation in neonatal chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes).

Myowa-Yamakoshi M(1), Tomonaga M, Tanaka M, Matsuzawa T.

Author information:
(1)School of Human Cultures, The University of Shiga Prefecture, Japan. 
myowa@shc.usp.ac.jp

This paper provides evidence for imitative abilities in neonatal chimpanzees 
(Pan troglodytes), our closest relatives. Two chimpanzees were reared from birth 
by their biological mothers. At less than 7 days of age the chimpanzees could 
discriminate between, and imitate, human facial gestures (tongue protrusion and 
mouth opening). By the time they were 2 months old, however, the chimpanzees no 
longer imitated the gestures. They began to perform mouth opening frequently in 
response to any of the three facial gestures presented to them. These findings 
suggest that neonatal facial imitation is most likely an innate ability, 
developed through natural selection in humans and in chimpanzees. The 
relationship between the disappearance of neonatal imitation and the development 
of social communicative behavior is discussed from an evolutionary perspective.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00364.x
PMID: 15484592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1396. Dev Sci. 2004 Sep;7(4):F11-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00356.x.

Immature cortical responses to auditory stimuli in specific language impairment: 
evidence from ERPs to rapid tone sequences.

Bishop DV(1), McArthur GM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, UK. 
dorothy.bishop@psy.ox.ac.uk

Event-related potentials (ERPs) to tone pairs and single tones were measured for 
16 participants with specific language impairment (SLI) and 16 age-matched 
controls aged from 10 to 19 years The tone pairs were separated by an 
inter-stimulus interval (ISI) of 20, 50 or 150 ms. The intraclass correlation 
(ICC) was computed for each participant between the ERP to a single tone and the 
ERP to the tone pair. A high ICC indicates that the brain response to a tone 
pair is similar to that for a single tone. ICCs were significantly higher at 
short than at long ISIs. At 50-ms ISI, ICCs were higher for younger than older 
participants. Age and ISI interacted with SLI status: ERPs of older participants 
with SLI differed from age-matched controls, and resembled ERPs of younger 
controls, consistent with a theory of immature auditory processing in SLI.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00356.x
PMID: 15484585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1397. Dev Sci. 2004 Feb;7(1):116-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00327.x.

Visual search in typically developing toddlers and toddlers with Fragile X or 
Williams syndrome.

Scerif G(1), Cornish K, Wilding J, Driver J, Karmiloff-Smith A.

Author information:
(1)Neurocognitive Development Unit, Institute of Child Health, University 
College London, UK. g.scerif@ich.ucl.ac.uk

Visual selective attention is the ability to attend to relevant visual 
information and ignore irrelevant stimuli. Little is known about its typical and 
atypical development in early childhood Experiment 1 investigates typically 
developing toddlers' visual search for multiple targets on a touch-screen. Time 
to hit a target, distance between successively touched items, accuracy and error 
types revealed changes in 2- and 3-year-olds' vulnerability to manipulations of 
the search display. Experiment 2 examined search performance by toddlers with 
Fragile X syndrome (FXS) or Williams syndrome (WS). Both of these groups 
produced equivalent mean time and distance per touch as typically developing 
toddlers matched by chronological or mental age; but both produced a larger 
number of errors. Toddlers with WS confused distractors with targets more than 
the other groups; while toddlers with FXS perseverated on previously found 
targets. These findings provide information on how visual search typically 
develops in toddlers, and reveal distinct search deficits for atypically 
developing toddlers.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00327.x
PMID: 15323123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1398. Dev Sci. 2004 Feb;7(1):103-15. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00326.x.

A longitudinal, microgenetic study of the emergence of false belief 
understanding and inhibition skills.

Flynn E(1), O'Malley C, Wood D.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology University of St Andrews, Fife, UK. 
egf1@st-andrews.ac.uk

Two theories that attempt to explain the relationship between false belief 
understanding and inhibition skills were investigated: (1) theory of mind 
development improves self-control, and (2) executive control is necessary for 
developing a theory of mind. A microgenetic approach was adopted, with a group 
of 21 children completing a battery of inhibition and false belief understanding 
tasks every four weeks for six phases of testing. The results showed that the 
majority of children were able to perform well on a test of executive inhibition 
before having a good understanding of false beliefs, thus supporting theory (2). 
The results also illustrated that while the children's inhibition skills 
developed relatively gradually, their understanding of false beliefs progressed 
from a consistent lack of understanding through a period of unstable 
performance, during which some children failed tests that they had previously 
passed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00326.x
PMID: 15323122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1399. Dev Sci. 2004 Feb;7(1):1-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00316.x.

A longitudinal study of gender-related cognition and behaviour.

Campbell A(1), Shirley L, Candy J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Durham University, UK. a.c.campbell@durham.ac.uk

Gender schema theory proposes that children's acquisition of gender labels and 
gender stereotypes informs gender-congruent behaviour. Most previous studies 
have been cross-sectional and do not address the temporal relationship between 
knowledge and behaviour. We report the results of a longitudinal study of gender 
knowledge and sex-typed behaviour across three domains in children tested at 24 
and 36 months (N = 56). Although both knowledge and sex-typed behaviour 
increased significantly between 2 and 3 years, there was no systematic pattern 
of cross-lagged correlations between the two, although some concurrent 
relationships were present at 24 months. Future longitudinal work might 
profitably focus on younger children using reliable preverbal measures of gender 
knowledge and employing a shorter lag between measurement times.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00316.x
PMID: 15323112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1400. Dev Sci. 2004 Apr;7(2):212-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00340.x.

The language-specific nature of grammatical development: evidence from bilingual 
language learners.

Marchman VA(1), Martínez-Sussmann C, Dale PS.

Author information:
(1)School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences, The University of Texas at Dallas, 
Richardson 75083-0688, USA. vamarch@utdallas.edu

The fact that early lexical and grammatical acquisition are strongly correlated 
has been cited as evidence against the view that the language faculty is 
composed of dissociable and autonomous modules (Bates & Goodman, 1997). However, 
previous studies have not yet eliminated the possibility that lexical-grammar 
associations may be attributable to language-general individual differences 
(e.g. children who are good at learning words are good at learning grammar). 
Parent report assessments of toddlers who are simultaneously learning English 
and Spanish (n = 113) allow an examination of the specificity of lexical-grammar 
relationships while holding child factors constant. Within-language 
vocabulary-grammar associations were stronger than cross-language relationships, 
even after controlling for age, proportion of language exposure, general 
language skill and reporter bias. Similar patterns were found based on 
naturalistic language samples (n = 22), ruling out a methodological artifact. 
These results are consistent with the view that grammar learning is specifically 
tied to lexical progress in a given language and provide further support for 
strong lexical-grammatical continuity early in acquisition.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00340.x
PMID: 15320381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1401. Dev Sci. 2004 Apr;7(2):201-11. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00339.x.

Origins of a stereotype: categorization of facial attractiveness by 6-month-old 
infants.

Ramsey JL(1), Langlois JH, Hoss RA, Rubenstein AJ, Griffin AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The University of Texas at Austin, 78712, USA.

Like adults, young infants prefer attractive to unattractive faces (e.g. 
Langlois, Roggman, Casey, Ritter, Rieser-Danner & Jenkins, 1987; Slater, von der 
Schulenburg, Brown, Badenoch, Butterworth, Parsons & Samuels, 1998). Older 
children and adults stereotype based on facial attractiveness (Eagly, Ashmore, 
Makhijani & Longo, 1991; Langlois, Kalakanis, Rubenstein, Larson, Hallam & 
Smooth, 2000). How do preferences for attractive faces develop into stereotypes? 
Several theories of stereotyping posit that categorization of groups is 
necessary before positive and negative traits can become linked to the groups 
(e.g. Taifel, Billig, Bundy & Flament, 1971; Zebrowitz-McArthur, 1982). We 
investigated whether or not 6-month-old infants can categorize faces as 
attractive or unattractive. In Experiment 1, we familiarized infants to 
unattractive female faces; in Experiment 2, we familiarized infants to 
attractive female faces and tested both groups of infants on novel faces from 
the familiar or novel attractiveness category. Results showed that 6-month-olds 
categorized attractive and unattractive female faces into two different groups 
of faces. Experiments 3 and 4 confirmed that infants could discriminate among 
the faces used in Experiments 1 and 2, and therefore categorized the faces based 
on their similarities in attractiveness rather than because they could not 
differentiate among the faces. These findings suggest that categorization of 
facial attractiveness may underlie the development of the 'beauty is good' 
stereotype.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00339.x
PMID: 15320380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1402. Dev Sci. 2004 Apr;7(2):194-200. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00338.x.

The dynamics of infant visual foraging.

Robertson SS(1), Guckenheimer J, Masnick AM, Bacher LF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Development, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. 
ssr4@cornell.edu

Erratum in
    Dev Sci. 2004 Jun;7(3):389.

Human infants actively forage for visual information from the moment of birth 
onward. Although we know a great deal about how stimulus characteristics 
influence looking behavior in the first few postnatal weeks, we know much less 
about the intrinsic dynamics of the behavior. Here we show that a simple 
stochastic dynamical system acts quantitatively like 4-week-old infants on a 
range of measures if there is hysteresis in the transitions between looking and 
looking away in the model system. The success of this simple three-parameter 
model suggests that visual foraging in the first few weeks after birth may be 
influenced more by noise and hysteresis in underlying neural mechanisms than by 
how infants process visual information after a look begins.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00338.x
PMID: 15320379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1403. Dev Sci. 2004 Apr;7(2):185-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00337.x.

A test of the generality of perceptually based categories found in infants: 
attentional differences toward natural kinds by New World monkeys.

Neiworth JJ(1), Parsons RR, Hassett JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Carleton College, Northfield, MN 55057, USA. 
jneiwort@carleton.edu

A preference to novelty paradigm used to study human infants (Quinn, 2002) 
examined attention to novel animal pictures at subordinate, basic and 
superordinate levels in tamarins. First, pairs of pictures were presented in 
phases, starting with a monkey species (subordinate level) and ending with 
mammal and dinosaur sets (superordinate levels). After each phase, tests paired 
novel pictures from the familiarized set with a novel broader category. Look 
rates toward each picture were coded. Tamarins looked significantly longer at a 
novel species after being familiarized with a monkey species, a species-specific 
effect. Subjects attended equivalently to novel primate species after 
habituation to four monkey species, but looked significantly longer at pictures 
of mammals, marking a more global-level inclusion and exclusion. Superordinate 
testing revealed that more novel and diverse sets were differentiated 
attentionally. The evidence implies that natural categorical representation 
occurs at an attentional level in primates in ways similar to human infants, and 
is affected by recent exposure and category variability.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00337.x
PMID: 15320378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1404. Dev Sci. 2004 Apr;7(2):158-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00333.x.

Evolving agents as a metaphor for the developing child.

Schlesinger M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Southern Illinois University Carbondale, 62901, 
USA. matthews@siu.edu

The emerging field of Evolutionary Computation (EC), inspired by neo-Darwinian 
principles (e.g. natural selection, mutation, etc. ), offers developmental 
psychologists a wide array of mathematical tools for simulating ontogenetic 
processes. In this brief review; I begin by highlighting three of the approaches 
that EC researchers employ (Artificial Life, evolutionary robotics and 
comparative stochastic optimization). I then focus on the advantages of using 
comparative stochastic optimization as a method for studying development. As a 
concrete example, I illustrate the design and implementation of an EC model that 
simulates the development of reaching in young infants.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00333.x
PMID: 15320374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1405. Dev Sci. 2004 Apr;7(2):133-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00330.x.

Autoassociator networks: insights into infant cognition.

Sirois S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Manchester, UK. 
sylvain.sirois@man.ac.uk

This paper presents autoassociator neural networks. A first section reviews the 
architecture of these models, common learning rules, and presents sample 
simulations to illustrate their abilities. In a second section, the ability of 
these models to account for learning phenomena such as habituation is reviewed. 
The contribution of these networks to discussions about infant cognition is 
highlighted. A new, modular approach is presented in a third section. In the 
discussion, a role for these learning models in a broader developmental 
framework is proposed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00330.x
PMID: 15320371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1406. Dev Sci. 1999 Mar;2(1):102-113. doi: 10.1111/1467-7687.00060.

Long-term memory, forgetting, and deferred imitation in 12-month-old infants.

Klein PJ(1), Meltzoff AN(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Washington, USA.

Long-term recall memory, as indexed by deferred imitation, was assessed in 
12-month-old infants. Independent groups of infants were tested after retention 
intervals of 3 min, 1 week and 4 weeks. Deferred imitation was assessed using 
the 'observation-only' procedure in which infants were not allowed motor 
practice on the tasks before the delay was imposed. Thus, the memory could not 
have been based on re-accessing a motor habit, because none was formed in the 
first place. After the delay, memory was assessed either in the same or a 
different environmental context from the one in which the adult had originally 
demonstrated the acts. In Experiments 1 and 3, infants observed the target acts 
while in an unusual environment (an orange and white polka-dot tent), and recall 
memory was tested in an ordinary room. In Experiment 2, infants observed the 
target acts in their homes and were tested for memory in a university room. The 
results showed recall memory after all retention intervals, including the 4 week 
delay, with no effect of context change. Interestingly, the forgetting function 
showed that the bulk of the forgetting occurred during the first week. The 
findings of recall memory without motor practice support the view that infants 
as young as 12 months old use a declarative (nonprocedural) memory system to 
span delay intervals as long as 4 weeks.

DOI: 10.1111/1467-7687.00060
PMCID: PMC4137880
PMID: 25147475


1407. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13033. doi: 10.1111/desc.13033. Epub 2020 Sep 8.

The sentence superiority effect in young readers.

Massol S(1), Grainger J(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'Etude des Mécanismes Cognitifs, Univ Lyon, Univ Lumière Lyon 2, 
Lyon, France.
(2)Laboratoire de Psychologie Cognitive, Centre National de Recherche 
Scientifique, Marseille, France.
(3)Institute of Language, Communication and the Brain, Aix-en-Provence, France.
(4)Aix-Marseille University, Marseille, France.

The sentence superiority effect observed with skilled adult readers has been 
taken to reflect parallel processing of word identities and the rapid 
construction of a preliminary syntactic structure. Here we examined if such 
processing is already present in primary school children in Grade 3 (average age 
8.9 years). Children saw sequences of four horizontally aligned words presented 
simultaneously for 500 ms and followed by a post-mask and post-cue indicating 
the position for report of one of the four words. Word identification was more 
accurate in grammatically correct sequences compared with ungrammatical 
scrambled sequences of the same words, and this sentence superiority effect did 
not interact with position. This replicates the pattern found in prior research 
with adults and suggests that parallel word processing and the associated 
efficiency in syntactic processing arealready in place in Grade 3. We also found 
that accuracy in identifying words, independently of the surrounding context, 
correlated with reading age. This points to efficient word-in-sequence 
identification as one key ingredient of the process of becoming a skilled 
reader.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13033
PMID: 32869456


1408. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13031. doi: 10.1111/desc.13031. Epub 2020 Sep 1.

The role of the corpus callosum in language network connectivity in children.

Bartha-Doering L(1)(2), Kollndorfer K(1)(2)(3), Schwartz E(3), Fischmeister 
FPS(4)(5), Alexopoulos J(1)(2)(6), Langs G(3), Prayer D(3), Kasprian G(3), Seidl 
R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Medical University of 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Comprehensive Center for Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.
(3)Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image-Guided Therapy, Medical University 
of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Institute of Psychology, University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(5)BioTechMed, Graz, Austria.
(6)Department of Psychoanalysis and Psychotherapy, Medical University of Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria.

The specific role of the corpus callosum (CC) in language network organization 
remains unclear, two contrasting models have been proposed: inhibition of 
homotopic areas allowing for independent functioning of the hemispheres versus 
integration of information from both hemispheres. This study aimed to add to 
this discussion with the first investigation of language network connectivity in 
combination with CC volume measures. In 38 healthy children aged 6-12, we 
performed task-based functional magnetic resonance imaging to measure language 
network connectivity, used structural magnetic resonance imaging to quantify CC 
subsection volumes, and administered various language tests to examine language 
abilities. We found an increase in left intrahemispheric and bilateral language 
network connectivity and a decrease in right intrahemispheric connectivity 
associated with larger volumes of the posterior, mid-posterior, and central 
subsections of the CC. Consistent with that, larger volumes of the posterior 
parts of the CC were significantly associated with better verbal fluency and 
vocabulary, the anterior CC volume was positively correlated with verbal span. 
Thus, children with larger volumes of CC subsections showed increased 
interhemispheric language network connectivity and were better in different 
language domains. This study presents the first evidence that the CC is directly 
linked to language network connectivity and underlines the excitatory role of 
the CC in the integration of information from both hemispheres.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13031
PMID: 32790079


1409. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13025. doi: 10.1111/desc.13025. Epub 2020 Sep 5.

Using a multidimensional model of attention to predict low-income preschoolers' 
early academic skills across time.

Shannon KA(1), Scerif G(2), Raver CC(1).

Author information:
(1)Applied Psychology, New York University, New York, NY, USA.
(2)University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

The current study examines the organization of attention skills across the 
preschool year before kindergarten, and tests how distinct attention 
subcomponents predict early academic skills in a sample of low-income children 
(n = 99). Children completed well-validated attention tasks in fall at 4.5 years 
old and spring at 5 years old, capturing the abilities to selectively focus, 
sustain attention, and employ executive control. Exploratory factor analyses at 
both time points support a 2-factor model differentiating selective and 
sustained attention from attention processing speed and executive attention, 
suggesting that attention in low-income preschoolers may have a simpler 
organization than the 3-factor structure found in adulthood. Multiple regression 
models find children's ability to selectively focus and sustain attention serves 
as a robust concurrent and longitudinal predictor of academic skills. These 
results highlight the role of selective and sustained attention processes in 
supporting school readiness for economically vulnerable children.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13025
PMID: 32749034


1410. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13019. doi: 10.1111/desc.13019. Epub 2020 Aug 10.

Cardiovascular fitness and executive functioning in primary school-aged 
children.

Meijer A(1), Königs M(2), de Bruijn AGM(3), Visscher C(4), Bosker RJ(3), Hartman 
E(4), Oosterlaan J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neuropsychology Section, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(2)Emma Neuroscience Group, Department of Pediatrics, Amsterdam Reproduction & 
Development, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Groningen Institute for Educational Research, University of Groningen, 
Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)University Medical Center Groningen, Center for Human Movement Sciences, 
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Previous research in children has shown that higher cardiovascular fitness is 
related to better executive functioning. However, the available literature is 
hampered by methodological limitations. The present study investigates the 
relationship between cardiovascular fitness and executive functioning in a large 
sample of healthy children (N = 814). Cardiovascular fitness was assessed with 
estimated VO2Max from 20 m Shuttle Run Test performance. Executive functioning 
was assessed using a set of computerized neurocognitive tasks aimed at executive 
functions (working memory, motor inhibition, interference control) and 
lower-level neurocognitive functions (information processing and attention). 
Dependent measures derived from the neurocognitive tests were subjected to 
principal component analysis. Mixed model analyses tested the relation between 
cardiovascular fitness and neurocognitive functioning components. Results showed 
that children with higher cardiovascular fitness performed better on the 
neurocognitive function components Information Processing and Control, 
Visuospatial Working Memory and Attention Efficiency. The following measures 
contained in these components contributed to the observed relations: information 
processing measures, visuospatial working memory, and speed of alerting 
attention. No relationship was found between cardiovascular fitness and the 
other components: Verbal Working Memory, Attention Accuracy, and Interference 
Control. The present study suggests that there is a relationship between 
cardiovascular fitness and a specific set of executive functions and lower level 
neurocognitive functions. These findings highlight the importance of 
cardiovascular fitness for the overall health of school-aged children.

© 2020 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13019
PMID: 32673418


1411. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13012. doi: 10.1111/desc.13012. Epub 2020 Aug 6.

Voluntary pursuit of negatively valenced stimuli from childhood to early 
adulthood.

Grisanzio KA(1), Sasse SF(1), Nook EC(1), Lambert HK(1), McLaughlin KA(1), 
Somerville LH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.

Although common sense suggests that we are motivated to pursue positive and 
avoid negative experiences, previous research shows that people regularly seek 
out negative experiences. In the current study, we characterized this tendency 
from childhood to young adulthood. Due to the known increases in risky behavior 
and sensation seeking in adolescence, we hypothesized that adolescents would 
show an increased engagement with negatively valenced stimuli compared to 
children and adults. Participants aged 4-25 (N = 192) completed a behavioral 
task assessing motivation to engage with negative, positive, and neutral images. 
On each trial, participants viewed two small images and selected one to view at 
a larger size for up to 10s. Trials were organized into three valence 
conditions: negative versus positive images (matched on arousal), negative 
versus neutral images, and positive versus neutral images. Although participants 
chose positive images more than neutral or negative images, participants 
selected negative images frequently, even when given a positive (28% of trials) 
or neutral (42% of trials) alternative. Contrary to expectations, the tendency 
to choose negative images was highest in early childhood and decreased linearly 
with increasing age, and the tendency to choose positive images increased 
linearly with age. These results provide insight into how motivation to engage 
with emotional stimuli varies across age. It is possible that the novelty and 
rarity of negative experiences drives children to pursue these stimuli. 
Alternatively, children may find negative images less aversive, which would 
caution against assuming that these stimuli elicit the same motivational states 
in individuals of all ages.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13012
PMCID: PMC7775909
PMID: 32615010

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.


1412. Dev Sci. 2019 Sep;22(5):e12799. doi: 10.1111/desc.12799. Epub 2019 Feb 20.

Violence and Latin-American preadolescents: A study of social brain function and 
cortisol levels.

Buchweitz A(1)(2)(3), de Azeredo LA(1)(2), Sanvicente-Vieira B(1)(3), Metsavaht 
Cará V(1)(2), Bianchini Esper N(1)(2), Soder RB(1), da Costa JC(1)(2), Portuguez 
MW(1), Franco AR(1)(4)(5), Grassi-Oliveira R(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)PUCRS, Brain Institute of Rio Grande do Sul (BraIns), Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(2)PUCRS, School of Medicine, Graduate Program of Medicine, Neurosciences, Porto 
Alegre, Brazil.
(3)PUCRS, School of Health Sciences, Graduate Program of Psychology, Porto 
Alegre, Brazil.
(4)Center for Biomedical Imaging and Neuromodulation, Nathan S. Kline Institute 
for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, NY.
(5)Center for the Developing Brain, Child Mind Institute, New York, NY.

The present study investigated exposure to violence and its association with 
brain function and hair cortisol concentrations in Latin-American 
preadolescents. Self-reported victimization scores (JVQ-R2), brain imaging 
(fMRI) indices for a social cognition task (the 'eyes test'), and hair cortisol 
concentrations were investigated, for the first time, in this population. The 
eyes test is based on two conditions: attributing mental state or sex to 
pictures of pairs of eyes (Baron-Cohen, Wheelwright, Hill, Raste, & Plumb, 
2001). The results showed an association among higher victimization scores and 
(a) less activation of posterior temporoparietal right-hemisphere areas, in the 
mental state condition only (including right temporal sulcus and fusiform 
gyrus); (b) higher functional connectivity indices for the Amygdala and Right 
Fusiform Gyrus (RFFG) pair of brain regions, also in the mental state condition 
only; (c) higher hair cortisol concentrations. The results suggest more exposure 
to violence is associated with significant differences in brain function and 
connectivity. A putative mechanism of less activation in posterior 
right-hemisphere regions and of synchronized Amygdala: RFFG time series was 
identified in the mental state condition only. The results also suggest 
measurable effects of exposure to violence in hair cortisol concentrations, 
which contribute to the reliability of self-reported scores by young 
adolescents. The findings are discussed in light of the effects of exposure to 
violence on brain function and on social-cognitive development in the adolescent 
brain. A video abstract of this article can be viewed at 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qHcXq7Y9PBk.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12799
PMID: 30648778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1413. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12599. doi: 10.1111/desc.12599. Epub 2017 Oct 26.

Top-down contextual knowledge guides visual attention in infancy.

Tummeltshammer K(1), Amso D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive, Linguistic & Psychological Sciences, Brown 
University, Providence, RI, USA.

The visual context in which an object or face resides can provide useful 
top-down information for guiding attention orienting, object recognition, and 
visual search. Although infants have demonstrated sensitivity to covariation in 
spatial arrays, it is presently unclear whether they can use rapidly acquired 
contextual knowledge to guide attention during visual search. In this 
eye-tracking experiment, 6- and 10-month-old infants searched for a target face 
hidden among colorful distracter shapes. Targets appeared in Old or New visual 
contexts, depending on whether the visual search arrays (defined by the spatial 
configuration, shape and color of component items in the search display) were 
repeated or newly generated throughout the experiment. Targets in Old contexts 
appeared in the same location within the same configuration, such that context 
covaried with target location. Both 6- and 10-month-olds successfully 
distinguished between Old and New contexts, exhibiting faster search times, 
fewer looks at distracters, and more anticipation of targets when contexts 
repeated. This initial demonstration of contextual cueing effects in infants 
indicates that they can use top-down information to facilitate orienting during 
memory-guided visual search.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12599
PMCID: PMC5920787
PMID: 29071811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1414. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12623. doi: 10.1111/desc.12623. Epub 2017 Oct 26.

Counting on fine motor skills: links between preschool finger dexterity and 
numerical skills.

Fischer U(1), Suggate SP(1), Schmirl J(1), Stoeger H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Educational Sciences, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, 
Germany.

Finger counting is widely considered an important step in children's early 
mathematical development. Presumably, children's ability to move their fingers 
during early counting experiences to aid number representation depends in part 
on their early fine motor skills (FMS). Specifically, FMS should link to 
children's procedural counting skills through consistent repetition of 
finger-counting procedures. Accordingly, we hypothesized that (a) FMS are linked 
to early counting skills, and (b) greater FMS relate to conceptual counting 
knowledge (e.g., cardinality, abstraction, order irrelevance) via procedural 
counting skills (i.e., one-one correspondence and correctness of verbal 
counting). Preschool children (N = 177) were administered measures of procedural 
counting skills, conceptual counting knowledge, FMS, and general cognitive 
skills along with parent questionnaires on home mathematics and fine motor 
environment. FMS correlated with procedural counting skills and conceptual 
counting knowledge after controlling for cognitive skills, chronological age, 
home mathematics and FMS environments. Moreover, the relationship between FMS 
and conceptual counting knowledge was mediated by procedural counting skills. 
Findings suggest that FMS play a role in early counting and therewith conceptual 
counting knowledge.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12623
PMID: 29071796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1415. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12615. doi: 10.1111/desc.12615. Epub 2017 Oct 22.

The cost of simplifying complex developmental phenomena: a new perspective on 
learning to walk.

Lee DK(1), Cole WG(2), Golenia L(3), Adolph KE(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Kinesiology, California State University, Fullerton, CA, USA.
(2)Center for Lifespan Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, 
Berlin, Germany.
(3)Center for Human Movement Sciences, University Medical Center Groningen, 
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Psychology, New York University, NY, USA.

Researchers can study complex developmental phenomena with all the inherent 
noise and complexity or simplify behaviors to hone in on the essential aspects 
of a phenomenon. We used the development of walking as a model system to compare 
the costs and benefits of simplifying a complex, noisy behavior. Traditionally, 
researchers simplify infant walking by recording gait measures as infants take 
continuous, forward steps along straight paths. Here, we compared the 
traditional straight-path task with spontaneous walking during 20 minutes of 
free play in 97 infants (10.75-19.99 months of age). We recorded infants' 
footfalls on an instrumented floor to calculate gait measures in the 
straight-path and free-play tasks. In addition, we scored videos for other 
critical aspects of spontaneous walking-steps per bout, shape of walking path, 
and step direction. Studying infant walking during free play incurred no cost 
compared with the straight-path task, but considerable benefits. Straight-path 
gait was highly correlated with spontaneous gait and both sets of measures 
improved with walking age, validating use of the straight-path task as an index 
of development. However, a large proportion of free-play bouts were too short to 
permit standard gait measures, and most bouts were curved with omnidirectional 
steps. The high prevalence of these "non-canonical" bouts was constant over 
development. We propose that a focus on spontaneous walking, the phenomenon we 
ostensibly wish to explain, yields important insights into the problems infants 
solve while learning to walk. Other areas of developmental research may also 
benefit from retaining the complexity of complex phenomena.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12615
PMCID: PMC5911424
PMID: 29057555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1416. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12607. doi: 10.1111/desc.12607. Epub 2017 Oct 12.

The development of morphological representations in young readers: a cross-modal 
priming study.

Quémart P(1), Gonnerman LM(2), Downing J(3), Deacon SH(3).

Author information:
(1)Université de Poitiers, Université de Tours and Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientifique, Poitiers, France.
(2)School of Communication Sciences and Disorders, McGill University, Montral, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Psychology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

The way children organize words in their memory has intrigued many researchers 
in the past 20 years. Given the large number of morphologically complex words in 
many languages, the influence of morphemes on this organization is being 
increasingly examined. The aim of this study was to understand how morphemic 
information influences English-speaking children's word recognition. Children in 
grades 3 and 5 were asked to complete a lexical decision priming task. 
Prime-target pairs varied in semantic similarity, with low (e.g., belly-bell), 
moderate (e.g., lately-late), and high similarity relations (e.g., boldly-bold). 
There were also word pairs similar in form only (e.g., spinach-spin) and in 
semantics only (e.g., garbage-trash). Primes were auditory and targets were 
presented visually. Analyses of children's lexical decision times revealed 
graded priming effects as a function of the convergence of form and meaning. 
These results indicate that developing readers do not necessarily need to 
lexicalize morphological units to facilitate word recognition. Their ability to 
process the morphological structure of words depends on their ability to develop 
connections between form and meaning.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12607
PMID: 29024328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1417. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12611. doi: 10.1111/desc.12611. Epub 2017 Oct 4.

Family conflict shapes how adolescents take risks when their family is affected.

Guassi Moreira JF(1), Telzer EH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology & Neuroscience, University of North Carolina, Chapel 
Hill, NC, USA.

Numerous studies have established that the social context greatly affects 
adolescent risk taking. However, it remains unexplored whether adolescents' 
decision-making behaviors change when they take risks that affect other 
individuals such as a parent. In the current study, we sought to investigate how 
the social context influences risky decisions when adolescents' behavior affects 
their family using a formalized risk-taking model. Sixty-three early adolescents 
(Mage = 13.3 years; 51% female) played a risk-taking task twice, once during 
which they could make risky choices that only affected themselves and another 
during which their risky choices only affected their parent. Results showed that 
adolescents reporting high family conflict made more risky decisions when taking 
risks for their parent compared to themselves, whereas adolescents reporting low 
family conflict made fewer risky decisions when taking risks for their parent 
compared to themselves. These findings are the first to show that adolescents 
change their decision-making behaviors when their risks affect their family and 
have important implications for current theories of adolescent risk taking.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12611
PMCID: PMC5882608
PMID: 28975678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1418. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12614. doi: 10.1111/desc.12614. Epub 2017 Sep 27.

Children show limited movement repertoire when learning a novel motor skill.

Lee MH(1), Farshchiansadegh A(2), Ranganathan R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Kinesiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, 
USA.

Examining age differences in motor learning using real-world tasks is often 
problematic due to task novelty and biomechanical confounds. Here, we 
investigated how children and adults acquire a novel motor skill in a virtual 
environment. Participants of three different age groups (9-year-olds, 
12-year-olds, and adults) learned to use their upper body movements to control a 
cursor on a computer screen. Results showed that 9-year-old and 12-year-old 
children showed poorer ability to control the cursor at the end of practice. 
Critically, when we investigated the movement coordination, we found that the 
lower task performance of children was associated with limited exploration of 
their movement repertoire. These results reveal the critical role of motor 
exploration in understanding developmental differences in motor learning.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12614
PMID: 28952183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1419. Dev Sci. 2018 Jul;21(4):e12604. doi: 10.1111/desc.12604. Epub 2017 Sep 24.

Overcoming the other-race effect in infancy with multisensory redundancy: 
10-12-month-olds discriminate dynamic other-race faces producing speech.

Minar NJ(1), Lewkowicz DJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for the Study of Child Development, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson 
Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ, USA.
(2)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northeastern University, 
Boston, MA, USA.

We tested 4-6- and 10-12-month-old infants to investigate whether the 
often-reported decline in infant sensitivity to other-race faces may reflect 
responsiveness to static or dynamic/silent faces rather than a general process 
of perceptual narrowing. Across three experiments, we tested discrimination of 
either dynamic own-race or other-race faces which were either accompanied by a 
speech syllable, no sound, or a non-speech sound. Results indicated that 4-6- 
and 10-12-month-old infants discriminated own-race as well as other-race faces 
accompanied by a speech syllable, that only the 10-12-month-olds discriminated 
silent own-race faces, and that 4-6-month-old infants discriminated own-race and 
other-race faces accompanied by a non-speech sound but that 10-12-month-old 
infants only discriminated own-race faces accompanied by a non-speech sound. 
Overall, the results suggest that the ORE reported to date reflects infant 
responsiveness to static or dynamic/silent faces rather than a general process 
of perceptual narrowing.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12604
PMID: 28944541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1420. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12592. doi: 10.1111/desc.12592. Epub 2017 Aug 30.

Selective social learning in infancy: looking for mechanisms.

Crivello C(1), Phillips S(1), Poulin-Dubois D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Concordia University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Although there is mounting evidence that selective social learning begins in 
infancy, the psychological mechanisms underlying this ability are currently a 
controversial issue. The purpose of this study is to investigate whether theory 
of mind abilities and statistical learning skills are related to infants' 
selective social learning. Seventy-seven 18-month-olds were first exposed to a 
reliable or an unreliable speaker and then completed a word learning task, two 
theory of mind tasks, and a statistical learning task. If domain-general 
abilities are linked to selective social learning, then infants who demonstrate 
superior performance on the statistical learning task should perform better on 
the selective learning task, that is, should be less likely to learn words from 
an unreliable speaker. Alternatively, if domain-specific abilities are involved, 
then superior performance on theory of mind tasks should be related to selective 
learning performance. Findings revealed that, as expected, infants were more 
likely to learn a novel word from a reliable speaker. Importantly, infants who 
passed a theory of mind task assessing knowledge attribution were significantly 
less likely to learn a novel word from an unreliable speaker compared to infants 
who failed this task. No such effect was observed for the other tasks. These 
results suggest that infants who possess superior social-cognitive abilities are 
more apt to reject an unreliable speaker as informant. A video abstract of this 
article can be viewed at: https://youtu.be/zuuCniHYzqo.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12592
PMID: 28856760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1421. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12589. doi: 10.1111/desc.12589. Epub 2017 Aug 15.

Literacy acquisition influences children's rapid automatized naming.

Peterson RL(1)(2), Arnett AB(3), Pennington BF(4), Byrne B(5)(6)(7)(8), 
Samuelsson S(5), Olson RK(5)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Children's Hospital Colorado, USA.
(2)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, University of Colorado 
School of Medicine, CO, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Denver, Denver, CO, USA.
(5)Department of Behavioural Sciences and Learning, Linköping University, 
Linköping, Sweden.
(6)School of Cognitive, Behavioural, and Social Sciences, University of New 
England, Armidale, New South Wales, Australia.
(7)Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its 
Disorders, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(8)National Health and Medical Research Council Centre of Research Excellence in 
Twin Research, Australia.
(9)Department of Psychology, University of Colorado at Boulder, CO, USA.

Previous research has established that learning to read improves children's 
performance on reading-related phonological tasks, including phoneme awareness 
(PA) and nonword repetition. Few studies have investigated whether literacy 
acquisition also promotes children's rapid automatized naming (RAN). We tested 
the hypothesis that literacy acquisition should influence RAN in an 
international, longitudinal population sample of twins. Cross-lagged path models 
evaluated the relationships among literacy, PA, and RAN across four time points 
from pre-kindergarten through grade 4. Consistent with previous research, 
literacy showed bidirectional relationships with reading-related oral language 
skills. We found novel evidence for an effect of earlier literacy on later RAN, 
which was most evident in children at early phases of literacy development. In 
contrast, the influence of earlier RAN on later literacy was predominant among 
older children. These findings imply that the association between these two 
related skills is moderated by development. Implications for models of reading 
development and for dyslexia research are discussed.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12589
PMCID: PMC5997458
PMID: 28812316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1422. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12581. doi: 10.1111/desc.12581. Epub 2017 Jul 26.

Let's chat: developmental neural bases of social motivation during real-time 
peer interaction.

Warnell KR(1), Sadikova E(2), Redcay E(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Texas State University, San Marcos, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, 
USA.
(3)Neuroscience and Cognitive Science Program, University of Maryland, College 
Park, Maryland, USA.

Humans are motivated to interact with each other, but the neural bases of social 
motivation have been predominantly examined in non-interactive contexts. 
Understanding real-world social motivation is of special importance during 
middle childhood (ages 8-12), a period when social skills improve, social 
networks grow, and social brain networks specialize. To assess interactive 
social motivation, the current study used a novel fMRI paradigm in which 
children believed they were chatting with a peer. The design targeted two phases 
of interaction: (1) Initiation, in which children engaged in a social bid via 
sharing a like or hobby, and (2) Reply, in which children received either an 
engaged ("Me too") or non-engaged ("I'm away") reply from the peer. On control 
trials, children were told that their answers were not shared and that they 
would receive either engaged ("Matched") or non-engaged ("Disconnected") replies 
from the computer. Results indicated that during Initiation and Reply, key 
components of reward circuitry (e.g., ventral striatum) were more active for the 
peer than the computer trials. In addition, during Reply, social cognitive 
regions were more activated by the peer, and this social cognitive 
specialization increased with age. Finally, the effect of engagement type on 
reward circuitry activation was larger for social than non-social trials, 
indicating developmental sensitivity to social contingency. These findings 
demonstrate that both reward and social cognitive brain systems support 
real-time social interaction in middle childhood. An interactive approach to 
understanding social reward has implications for clinical disorders, where 
social motivation is more affected in real-world contexts.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12581
PMCID: PMC7060940
PMID: 28748572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1423. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12576. doi: 10.1111/desc.12576. Epub 2017 Jul 24.

Seven-year-olds' aggressive choices in a computer game can be predicted in 
infancy.

Hay DF(1), Johansen MK(1), Daly P(1), Hashmi S(1), Robinson C(1), Collishaw 
S(1), van Goozen S(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Cardiff University, UK.

Concerns about the relationship between computer games and children's aggression 
have been expressed for decades, but it is not yet clear whether the content of 
such games evokes aggression or a prior history of aggression promotes 
children's interest in aggressive games. Two hundred and sixty-six 7-year-old 
children from a nationally representative longitudinal sample in the UK played a 
novel computer game (CAMGAME) in which the child's avatar encountered a series 
of social challenges that might evoke aggressive, prosocial or neutral 
behaviour. Aggressive choices during the game were predicted by well-known risk 
factors for aggressive conduct problems and the children's own early angry 
aggressiveness as infants. These findings suggest that children who are 
predisposed to aggression bring those tendencies to virtual as well as real 
environments.

© 2017 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12576
PMCID: PMC5947600
PMID: 28736940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1424. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12586. doi: 10.1111/desc.12586. Epub 2017 Jul 13.

Foundations of infants' social group evaluations.

Pun A(1), Ferera M(2), Diesendruck G(2), Kiley Hamlin J(1), Baron AS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Tel Aviv, Israel.

Previous research has suggested that infants exhibit a preference for familiar 
over unfamiliar social groups (e.g., preferring individuals from their own 
language group over individuals from a foreign language group). However, because 
past studies often employ forced-choice procedures, it is not clear whether 
infants' intergroup preferences are driven by positivity toward members of 
familiar groups, negativity toward members of unfamiliar groups, or both. Across 
six experiments, we implemented a habituation procedure to independently measure 
infants' positive and negative evaluations of speakers of familiar and 
unfamiliar languages. We report that by 1 year of age, infants positively 
evaluate individuals who speak a familiar language, but do not negatively 
evaluate individuals who speak an unfamiliar language (Experiments 1 and 2). 
Several experiments rule out lower-level explanations (Experiments 3-6). 
Together these data suggest that children's early social group preferences may 
be shaped by positive evaluations of familiar group(s), rather than negative 
evaluations of unfamiliar groups.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12586
PMID: 28703876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1425. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12524. Epub 2017 Jul 3.

Accent detection and social cognition: evidence of protracted learning.

Creel SC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Science, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, CA, USA.

How and when do children become aware that speakers have different accents? 
While adults readily make a variety of subtle social inferences based on 
speakers' accents, findings from children are more mixed: while one line of 
research suggests that even infants may be acutely sensitive to accent 
unfamiliarity, other studies suggest that 5-year-olds have difficulty 
identifying accents as different from their own. In an attempt to resolve this 
paradox, the current study assesses American children's sensitivity to American 
vs. Dutch accents in two situations. First, in an eye-tracked sentence 
processing paradigm where children have previously shown sensitivity to a 
salient social distinction (gender) from voice cues, 3-5-year-old children 
showed no sensitivity to accent differences. Second, in a social decision-making 
task where accent sensitivity has been found in 5-year-olds, an age gradient 
appeared, suggesting that familiar accent preferences emerge slowly between 3 
and 7 years. Counter to claims that accent is an early, salient signal of social 
group, results are more consistent with a protracted learning hypothesis that 
children need extended exposure to native-language sound patterns in order to 
detect that an accent deviates from their own. A video abstract of this article 
can be viewed at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BQAgy3IFYXA.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12524
PMID: 28675671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1426. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12573. doi: 10.1111/desc.12573. Epub 2017 Jun 21.

Longitudinal associations between low morning cortisol in infancy and anger 
dysregulation in early childhood in a CPS-referred sample.

Frost A(1), Jelinek C(2), Bernard K(1), Lind T(2), Dozier M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Delaware, 
Newark, Delaware, USA.

Children who experience early adversity are at increased risk for developing 
psychopathology, and dysfunction of the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal (HPA) 
axis is a possible mechanism conferring this risk. This study sought to 
characterize the association between morning cortisol during different 
developmental periods and deficits in children's emotion regulation, a core 
feature of many psychological disorders. Morning cortisol was collected at two 
time points (i.e., during infancy, M = 13.0 months old, and during early 
childhood, M = 36.8 months old) from 120 children with histories of child 
protective services (CPS) involvement. Children completed a lab visit during 
early childhood (M = 38.6 months old) that involved an observational measure of 
anger regulation. Results showed that low morning cortisol during infancy, but 
not early childhood, predicted increased anger dysregulation during early 
childhood. These results highlight the importance of developmental timing in 
assessing the effects of HPA axis functioning and suggest that low cortisol 
during infancy is a risk factor for later emotion regulation difficulties.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12573
PMID: 28639383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1427. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12574. doi: 10.1111/desc.12574. Epub 2017 Jun 5.

Transient sex differences during adolescence on auditory perceptual tasks.

Huyck JJ(1), Wright BA(2).

Author information:
(1)Speech Pathology and Audiology Program, Kent State University, Kent, Ohio, 
USA.
(2)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders and Knowles Hearing 
Center, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, USA.

Many perceptual abilities differ between the sexes. Because these sex 
differences have been documented almost exclusively in adults, they have been 
attributed to sex-specific neural circuitry that emerges during development and 
is maintained in the mature perceptual system. To investigate whether behavioral 
sex differences in perception can also have other origins, we compared 
performance between males and females ranging in age from 8 to 30 years on 
auditory temporal-interval discrimination and tone-in-noise detection tasks on 
which there are no sex differences in adults. If sex differences in perception 
arise only from the establishment and subsequent maintenance of sex-specific 
neural circuitry, there should be no sex differences during development on these 
tasks. In contrast, sex differences emerged in adolescence but resolved by 
adulthood on two of the six conditions, with signs of a similar pattern on a 
third condition. In each case, males reached mature performance earlier than 
females, resulting in a sex difference in the interim. These results suggest 
that sex differences in perception may arise from differences in the 
maturational timing of common circuitry used by both sexes. They also imply that 
sex differences in perceptual abilities may be more prevalent than previously 
thought based on adult data alone.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12574
PMID: 28585226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1428. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12575. doi: 10.1111/desc.12575. Epub 2017 May 30.

Auditory access, language access, and implicit sequence learning in deaf 
children.

Hall ML(1), Eigsti IM(2), Bortfeld H(3), Lillo-Martin D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Linguistics, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut, 
USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut, 
USA.
(3)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of California Merced, 
Merced, California, USA.

Developmental psychology plays a central role in shaping evidence-based best 
practices for prelingually deaf children. The Auditory Scaffolding Hypothesis 
(Conway et al., 2009) asserts that a lack of auditory stimulation in deaf 
children leads to impoverished implicit sequence learning abilities, measured 
via an artificial grammar learning (AGL) task. However, prior research is 
confounded by a lack of both auditory and language input. The current study 
examines implicit learning in deaf children who were (Deaf native signers) or 
were not (oral cochlear implant users) exposed to language from birth, and in 
hearing children, using both AGL and Serial Reaction Time (SRT) tasks. Neither 
deaf nor hearing children across the three groups show evidence of implicit 
learning on the AGL task, but all three groups show robust implicit learning on 
the SRT task. These findings argue against the Auditory Scaffolding Hypothesis, 
and suggest that implicit sequence learning may be resilient to both auditory 
and language deprivation, within the tested limits. A video abstract of this 
article can be viewed at: https://youtu.be/EeqfQqlVHLI [Correction added on 07 
August 2017, after first online publication: The video abstract link was 
added.].

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12575
PMID: 28557278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1429. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12572. doi: 10.1111/desc.12572. Epub 2017 May 18.

Iconicity in the speech of children and adults.

Perry LK(1), Perlman M(2), Winter B(3), Massaro DW(4), Lupyan G(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida, USA.
(2)Language and Cognition Group, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of English Language and Literature, University of Birmingham, UK.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of California Santa Cruz, USA.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin Madison, USA.

Iconicity - the correspondence between form and meaning - may help young 
children learn to use new words. Early-learned words are higher in iconicity 
than later learned words. However, it remains unclear what role iconicity may 
play in actual language use. Here, we ask whether iconicity relates not just to 
the age at which words are acquired, but also to how frequently children and 
adults use the words in their speech. If iconicity serves to bootstrap word 
learning, then we would expect that children should say highly iconic words more 
frequently than less iconic words, especially early in development. We would 
also expect adults to use iconic words more often when speaking to children than 
to other adults. We examined the relationship between frequency and iconicity 
for approximately 2000 English words. Replicating previous findings, we found 
that more iconic words are learned earlier. Moreover, we found that more iconic 
words tend to be used more by younger children, and adults use more iconic words 
when speaking to children than to other adults. Together, our results show that 
young children not only learn words rated high in iconicity earlier than words 
low in iconicity, but they also produce these words more frequently in 
conversation - a pattern that is reciprocated by adults when speaking with 
children. Thus, the earliest conversations of children are relatively higher in 
iconicity, suggesting that this iconicity scaffolds the production and 
comprehension of spoken language during early development.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12572
PMID: 28523758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1430. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12555. doi: 10.1111/desc.12555. Epub 2017 May 2.

Relationship between sports experience and executive function in 6-12-year-old 
children: independence from physical fitness and moderation by gender.

Ishihara T(1), Sugasawa S(2), Matsuda Y(2), Mizuno M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Fitness Science, Graduate School of Education, 
Hokkaido University, Japan.
(2)Nagoya Green Tennis Club Group, Japan.
(3)Faculty of Education, Hokkaido University, Japan.

The purpose of this study was to evaluate the relationship between sports 
experience (i.e., tennis experience) and executive function in children while 
controlling for physical activity and physical fitness. Sixty-eight participants 
(6-12 years old, 34 males and 34 females) were enrolled in regular tennis 
lessons (mean = 2.4 years, range = 0.1-7.3 years) prior to the study. Executive 
functions, including inhibitory control (the Stroop Color-Word Test), working 
memory (the 2-back Task), and cognitive flexibility (the Local-global Task) were 
evaluated. Participants' levels of daily physical activity, ranging from 
moderate to vigorous, were evaluated using triaxial accelerometers. The total 
score for physical fitness was assessed using the Tennis Field Test. 
Hierarchical multiple regression analyses revealed interaction effects between 
gender and tennis experience on participants' reaction time (RT) on the switch 
cost of the Local-global Task after controlling for age, BMI, gender, physical 
activity, physical fitness, and tennis experience. Longer tennis experience was 
associated with shorter switch cost in males but not in females. Higher scores 
on physical fitness were positively associated with lower interference scores on 
the Stroop Color-Word Test, RT on the 2-back Task, and RT in the switching 
condition of the Local-global Task, after controlling for age, BMI, gender, and 
physical activity. In conclusion, all three foundational components of executive 
function (i.e., inhibitory control, working memory, and cognitive flexibility) 
were more strongly related to physical fitness than to physical activity in 
males and females, whereas greater cognitive flexibility was related to tennis 
experience only in the males.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12555
PMID: 28464437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1431. Dev Sci. 2018 May;21(3):e12562. doi: 10.1111/desc.12562. Epub 2017 Apr 5.

Development of infant sustained attention and its relation to EEG oscillations: 
an EEG and cortical source analysis study.

Xie W(1)(2), Mallin BM(3), Richards JE(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South 
Carolina, USA.
(2)Institute for Mind and Brain, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South 
Carolina, USA.
(3)Ultrasound Leadership Academy, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

The current study examined the relation between infant sustained attention and 
infant EEG oscillations. Fifty-nine infants were tested at 6 (N = 15), 8 
(N = 17), 10 (N = 14), and 12 (N = 13) months. Three attention phases, stimulus 
orienting, sustained attention, and attention termination, were defined based on 
infants' heart rate changes. Frequency analysis using simultaneously recorded 
EEG focused on infant theta (2-6 Hz), alpha (6-9 Hz), and beta (9-14 Hz) 
rhythms. Cortical source analysis of EEG oscillations was conducted with 
realistic infant MRI models. Theta synchronization was found over fontal pole, 
temporal, and parietal electrodes during infant sustained attention for 10 and 
12 months. Alpha desynchronization was found over frontal, central and parietal 
electrodes during sustained attention. This alpha effect started to emerge at 
10 months and became well established by 12 months. No difference was found for 
the beta rhythm between different attention phases. The theta synchronization 
effect was localized to the orbital frontal, temporal pole, and ventral temporal 
areas. The alpha desynchronization effect was localized to the brain regions 
composing the default mode network including the posterior cingulate cortex and 
precuneus, medial prefrontal cortex, and inferior parietal gyrus. The alpha 
desynchronization effect was also localized to the pre- and post-central gyri. 
The present study demonstrates a connection between infant sustained attention 
and EEG oscillatory activities.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12562
PMCID: PMC5628078
PMID: 28382759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interests The authors have approved 
the manuscript and agreed with its submission. These authors declare no conflict 
of interest.


1432. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2):10.1111/desc.12556. doi: 10.1111/desc.12556. Epub 2017 
Mar 2.

The ontogeny of relational memory and pattern separation.

Ngo CT(1), Newcombe NS(1), Olson IR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Episodic memory relies on memory for the relations among multiple elements of an 
event and the ability to discriminate among similar elements of episodes. The 
latter phenomenon, termed pattern separation, has been studied mainly in young 
and older adults with relatively little research on children. Building on prior 
work with young children, we created an engaging computer-administered 
relational memory task assessing what-where relations. We also modified the 
Mnemonic Similarity Task used to assess pattern discrimination in young and 
older adults for use with preschool children. Results showed that 4-year-olds 
performed significantly worse than 6-year-olds and adults on both tasks, whereas 
6-year-olds and adults performed comparably, even though there were no ceiling 
effects. However, performance on the two tasks did not correlate, suggesting 
that two distinct mnemonic processes with different developmental trajectories 
may contribute to age-related changes in episodic memory.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12556
PMCID: PMC5901663
PMID: 28256097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1433. Dev Sci. 2018 Jan;21(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12496. Epub 2017 Mar 2.

Development of allocentric spatial recall from new viewpoints in virtual 
reality.

Negen J(1), Heywood-Everett E(1), Roome HE(1), Nardini M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Durham University, Durham, UK.

Using landmarks and other scene features to recall locations from new viewpoints 
is a critical skill in spatial cognition. In an immersive virtual reality task, 
we asked children 3.5-4.5 years old to remember the location of a target using 
various cues. On some trials they could use information from their own 
self-motion. On some trials they could use a view match. In the very hardest 
kind of trial, they were 'teleported' to a new viewpoint and could only use an 
allocentric spatial representation. This approach provides a strict test for 
allocentric coding (without either a matching viewpoint or self-motion 
information) while avoiding additional task demands in previous studies (it does 
not require them to deal with a small table-top environment or to manage 
stronger cue conflicts). Both the younger and older groups were able to point 
back at the target location better than chance when they could use view matching 
and/or self-motion, but allocentric recall was only seen in the older group 
(4.0-4.5). In addition, we only obtained evidence for a specific kind of 
allocentric recall in the older group: they tracked one major axis of the space 
significantly above chance, r(158) = .28, but not the other, r(158) = -.01. We 
conclude that there is a major qualitative change in coding for spatial recall 
around the fourth birthday, potentially followed by further development towards 
fully flexible recall from new viewpoints.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12496
PMID: 28256025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1434. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12530. Epub 2017 Feb 27.

It's about time: revisiting temporal processing deficits in dyslexia.

Casini L(1)(2), Pech-Georgel C(3), Ziegler JC(2)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, LNC, Laboratoire de Neurosciences Cognitives, 
Marseille, France.
(2)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, FR 3C, Marseille, France.
(3)Centre de Références des Troubles d'Apprentissages, Institut du Développement 
de l'Enfant et de sa Communication (IDEC), Hôpital Salvator, Marseille, France.
(4)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, LPC, Laboratoire de Psychologie Cognitive, 
Marseille, France.
(5)Brain and Language Research Institute, Aix-Marseille University, Marseille, 
France.

Temporal processing in French children with dyslexia was evaluated in three 
tasks: a word identification task requiring implicit temporal processing, and 
two explicit temporal bisection tasks, one in the auditory and one in the visual 
modality. Normally developing children matched on chronological age and reading 
level served as a control group. Children with dyslexia exhibited robust 
deficits in temporal tasks whether they were explicit or implicit and whether 
they involved the auditory or the visual modality. First, they presented larger 
perceptual variability when performing temporal tasks, whereas they showed no 
such difficulties when performing the same task on a non-temporal dimension 
(intensity). This dissociation suggests that their difficulties were specific to 
temporal processing and could not be attributed to lapses of attention, reduced 
alertness, faulty anchoring, or overall noisy processing. In the framework of 
cognitive models of time perception, these data point to a dysfunction of the 
'internal clock' of dyslexic children. These results are broadly compatible with 
the recent temporal sampling theory of dyslexia.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12530
PMID: 28239921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1435. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12527. Epub 2017 Feb 22.

Children's selective trust decisions: rational competence and limiting 
performance factors.

Hermes J(1)(2), Behne T(1)(2), Bich AE(1), Thielert C(1), Rakoczy H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Psychology, Institute of Psychology, University 
of Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Leibniz Science Campus Primate Cognition, Göttingen, Germany.

Recent research has amply documented that even preschoolers learn selectively 
from others, preferring, for example, reliable over unreliable and competent 
over incompetent models. It remains unclear, however, what the cognitive 
foundations of such selective learning are, in particular, whether it builds on 
rational inferences or on less sophisticated processes. The current study, 
therefore, was designed to test directly the possibility that children are in 
principle capable of selective learning based on rational inference, yet revert 
to simpler strategies such as global impression formation under certain 
circumstances. Preschoolers (N = 75) were shown pairs of models that either 
differed in their degree of competence within one domain (strong vs. weak or 
knowledgeable vs. ignorant) or were both highly competent, but in different 
domains (e.g., strong vs. knowledgeable model). In the test trials, children 
chose between the models for strength- or knowledge-related tasks. The results 
suggest that, in fact, children are capable of rational inference-based 
selective trust: when both models were highly competent, children preferred the 
model with the competence most predictive and relevant for a given task. 
However, when choosing between two models that differed in competence on one 
dimension, children reverted to halo-style wide generalizations and preferred 
the competent models for both relevant and irrelevant tasks. These findings 
suggest that the rational strategies for selective learning, that children 
master in principle, can get masked by various performance factors.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12527
PMID: 28229561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1436. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12538. Epub 2017 Feb 22.

Transition to success on the model room task: the importance of improvements in 
working memory.

Hartstein LE(1), Berthier NE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Massachusetts 
Amherst, USA.

Previous work has shown that children under age 3 often perform very poorly on 
the model room task, in which they are asked to find a hidden toy based on its 
location in a scale model. One prominent theory for their failure is that they 
lack the ability to understand the model as both a physical object and as a 
symbolic representation of the larger room. A hypothesized additional component 
is that they need to overcome weak, competing representations of where the 
object was on a previous trial, and where it is in the present trial, in order 
to succeed in their search. Children aged 33-39 months were tested on the model 
room task, as well as on measures of cognitive inhibitory control, cognitive 
flexibility, and working memory. Results showed that performance on the model 
room task was not predicted by measures of inhibitory control or cognitive 
flexibility, but was predicted by performance on the Delayed Recognition Span 
Test (DRST), a measure of working memory. These findings lend support to the 
theory of competing representations and demonstrate the necessity of updating 
and maintaining strong representations in working memory to succeed in the 
search task.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12538
PMID: 28229518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1437. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12542. Epub 2017 Feb 22.

Shared musical knowledge in 11-month-old infants.

Mehr SA(1)(2), Spelke ES(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Education, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Five-month-old infants selectively attend to novel people who sing melodies 
originally learned from a parent, but not melodies learned from a musical toy or 
from an unfamiliar singing adult, suggesting that music conveys social 
information to infant listeners. Here, we test this interpretation further in 
older infants with a more direct measure of social preferences. We randomly 
assigned 64 11-month-old infants to 1-2 weeks' exposure to one of two novel play 
songs that a parent either sang or produced by activating a recording inside a 
toy. Infants then viewed videos of two new people, each singing one song. When 
the people, now silent, each presented the infant with an object, infants in 
both conditions preferentially chose the object endorsed by the singer of the 
familiar song. Nevertheless, infants' visual attention to that object was 
predicted by the degree of song exposure only for infants who learned from the 
singing of a parent. Eleven-month-olds thus garner social information from 
songs, whether learned from singing people or from social play with musical 
toys, but parental singing has distinctive effects on infants' responses to new 
singers. Both findings support the hypothesis that infants endow music with 
social meaning. These findings raise questions concerning the types of music and 
behavioral contexts that elicit infants' social responses to those who share 
music with them, and they support suggestions concerning the psychological 
functions of music both in contemporary environments and in the environments in 
which humans evolved.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12542
PMID: 28229502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1438. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2):10.1111/desc.12519. doi: 10.1111/desc.12519. Epub 2016 
Dec 29.

Who's my little monkey? Effects of infant-directed speech on visual retention in 
infant rhesus macaques.

Slonecker EM(1), Simpson EA(2), Suomi SJ(1), Paukner A(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Comparative Ethology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute 
of Child Health & Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Department 
of Health and Human Services, Poolesville, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA.

Both human and nonhuman primate adults use infant-directed facial and vocal 
expressions across many contexts when interacting with infants (e.g., feeding, 
playing). This infant-oriented style of communication, known as infant-directed 
speech (IDS), seems to benefit human infants in numerous ways, including 
facilitating language acquisition. Given the variety of contexts in which adults 
use IDS, we hypothesized that IDS supports learning beyond the linguistic domain 
and that these benefits may extend to nonhuman primates. We exposed 
2.5-month-old rhesus macaque infants (N = 15) to IDS, adult-directed speech 
(ADS), and a non-social control (CTR) during a video presentation of unrelated 
stimuli. After a 5- or 60-minute delay, infants were shown the familiar video 
side-by-side with a novel video. Infants exhibited a novelty preference after 
the 5-minute delay, but not after the 60-minute delay, in the ADS and CTR 
conditions, and a novelty preference in the IDS condition only after the 
60-minute delay. These results are the first to suggest that exposure to IDS 
affects infants' long-term memory, even in non-linguistic animals.

© 2016 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12519
PMCID: PMC5491378
PMID: 28032454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1439. Dev Sci. 2018 Jan;21(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12506. Epub 2016 Dec 15.

Judgments of damage to public versus private property in Chinese children at 
different historical times.

Chen X(1), Li D(2), Liu J(2), Chen H(3), Zhao S(1).

Author information:
(1)Applied Psychology-Human Development Division, Graduate School of Education, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Shanghai Normal University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Institute of Developmental Psychology, Beijing Normal University, Beijjing, 
China.

This study examined children's judgments of damage to public versus private 
property in China at two historical times. Participants were two cohorts (1980 
and 2012) of elementary school children at ages 7, 9, and 11 years. The children 
were administered paired stories that described a protagonist who damaged public 
or private property with a good or bad intention. The results showed that 
children in the 2012 cohort were less likely than their counterparts in the 1980 
cohort to judge damage to public property as more culpable than damage to 
private property. The cohort differences were more evident in older children 
than in younger children. The results suggest that macro-level contexts may play 
an important role in shaping children's judgments.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12506
PMID: 27981739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1440. Dev Sci. 2018 Jan;21(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12511. Epub 2016 Dec 13.

Training and transfer effects of response inhibition training in children and 
adults.

Zhao X(1), Chen L(1), Maes JHR(2).

Author information:
(1)Behavior Rehabilitation Training Research Institution, School of Psychology, 
Northwest Normal University, Lanzhou, China.
(2)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Centre for Cognition, 
Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Response inhibition is crucial for mental and physical health but studies 
assessing the trainability of this type of inhibition are rare. Thirty-nine 
children aged 10-12 years and 46 adults aged 18-24 years were assigned to an 
adaptive go/no-go inhibition training condition or an active control condition. 
Transfer of training effects to performance on tasks assessing response 
inhibition, interference control, working memory updating, task-switching, and 
non-verbal fluid intelligence were assessed during 3- and 6-month follow-up 
sessions and/or an immediate post-training session. Significant training 
improvements and positive transfer effects to a similar response inhibition task 
with other stimuli were observed for both children and adults. Reliable albeit 
short-lived transfer effects were only found for the children, specifically to 
working memory updating and task switching. These results suggest some potential 
for response-inhibition training programs to enhance aspects of cognitive 
functioning in children but not adults.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12511
PMID: 27966279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1441. Dev Sci. 2018 Mar;21(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12526. Epub 2016 Dec 5.

Time processing impairments in preschoolers at risk of developing difficulties 
in mathematics.

Tobia V(1), Rinaldi L(2)(3), Marzocchi GM(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Milan-Bicocca, Milano, Italy.
(2)Department of Brain and Behavioural Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia, 
Italy.
(3)NeuroMi-Milan Center for Neuroscience, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, 
Italy.
(4)Centro per l'Età Evolutiva, Bergamo, Italy.

The occurrence of time processing problems in individuals with Development 
Dyscalculia (DD) has favored the view of a general magnitude system devoted to 
both numerical and temporal information. Yet, this scenario has been partially 
challenged by studies indicating that time difficulties can be attributed to 
poor calculation or counting skills, which can support reasoning on time in 
school-aged children and adults. Here, we tackle this debate by exploring the 
performance of young children before they fully develop the symbolic number 
system. Preschoolers at risk of developing DD were compared with typically 
developing children in a series of tasks investigating time processing and in 
their 'sense of time', evaluated by parents and teachers. Results yielded a 
poorer performance in time reproduction of 5-second intervals and in time 
discrimination, as well as a weaker 'sense of time', in children at risk of DD. 
These findings provide evidence of a common magnitude system that would be 
responsible for deficits in both numerical and temporal domains, already at 
early stages of life.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12526
PMID: 27921356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1442. Dev Sci. 2018 Jan;21(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12500. Epub 2016 Nov 20.

Four-month-old infants individuate and track simple tools following functional 
demonstrations.

Stavans M(1), Baillargeon R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Illinois, Champaign, Illinois, USA.

Two experiments examined whether 4-month-olds (n = 120) who were induced to 
assign two objects to different categories would then be able to take advantage 
of these contrastive categorical encodings to individuate and track the objects. 
In each experiment, infants first watched functional demonstrations of two 
tools, a masher and tongs (Experiment 1) or a marker and a knife (Experiment 2). 
Next, half the infants saw the two tools brought out alternately from behind a 
screen, which was then lowered to reveal only one of the tools 
(different-objects condition); the other infants saw similar events except that 
the same tool was shown on either side of the screen (same-object condition). In 
both experiments, infants in the different-objects condition looked reliably 
longer than those in the same-object condition, and this effect was eliminated 
if the demonstrations involved similar but non-functional actions. Together, 
these results indicate that infants (a) were led by the functional 
demonstrations they observed to assign the two tools to distinct categories, (b) 
recruited these categorical encodings to individuate and track the tools, and 
hence (c) detected a violation in the different-objects condition when the 
screen was lowered to reveal only one tool. Categorical information thus plays a 
privileged role in individuation and identity tracking from a very young age.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12500
PMID: 27866378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1443. Dev Sci. 2017 Jan;20(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12486. Epub 2016 Nov 9.

Bilingualism affects 9-month-old infants' expectations about how words refer to 
kinds.

Byers-Heinlein K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Concordia University, Canada.

Infants are precocious word learners, and seem to possess systematic 
expectations about how words refer to object kinds. For example, while 
monolingual infants show a one-to-one mapping bias (e.g. mutual exclusivity), 
expecting each object to have only one basic level label, previous research has 
shown that this is less robust in bi- and multilinguals aged 1.5 years and 
older. This study examined the early origins of such one-to-one mapping biases 
by comparing monolingual and bilingual 9-10-month-olds' expectations about the 
relationship between labels and object kinds. In a violation of expectation 
paradigm, infants heard a speaker name hidden objects with either one label ('I 
see a mouba! I see a mouba!') or two labels ('I see a camo! I see a tenda!'). An 
occluder moved to reveal two objects that were either identical or of different 
kinds. Monolingual infants looked longest when two labels were associated with 
identical objects, and when one label was associated with objects of different 
kinds, showing that they found these outcomes unexpected. This replicated 
previous findings showing that monolinguals expect that distinct words label 
distinct object kinds (Dewar & Xu, ). Bilinguals looked equally to the outcomes 
regardless of the number of labels, showing no such expectations. This finding 
indicates that bilingualism influences young infants' expectations about how 
words refer to kinds, and more broadly supports the position that language 
experience contributes to the development of word learning heuristics.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12486
PMID: 27860099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1444. Dev Sci. 2017 Nov;20(6):e12452. doi: 10.1111/desc.12452. Epub 2016 Oct 26.

Investigating looking and social looking measures as an index of infant 
violation of expectation.

Dunn K(1), Bremner JG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Lancaster University, UK.

Accumulated looking time has been widely used to index violation of expectation 
(VoE) response in young infants. But there is controversy concerning the 
validity of this measure, with some interpreting infant looking behaviour in 
terms of perceptual preferences (Cohen & Marks, ; Haith, ). The current study 
aimed to compare the use of looking time with a recently used measure of social 
looking (Walden et al., ) in distinguishing between 6-month-old infants' 
response to novelty/familiarity and a condition in which the object was covertly 
switched for a different object. Following habituation, infants showed more 
social looking in response to the object-switch condition than the novel object 
change, whereas the more commonly used accumulated looking time measure did not 
distinguish between the two, showing an increase for both. Thus, social looking 
is a more valid measure of infant VoE than looking time.

© 2016 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12452
PMCID: PMC5697609
PMID: 27781330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1445. Dev Sci. 2017 Jul;20(4). doi: 10.1111/desc.12448. Epub 2016 Oct 23.

Amygdala-orbitofrontal connectivity predicts alcohol use two years later: a 
longitudinal neuroimaging study on alcohol use in adolescence.

Peters S(1)(2), Peper JS(1)(2), Van Duijvenvoorde ACK(1)(2), Braams BR(1)(2), 
Crone EA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Educational Psychology, Leiden University, 
The Netherlands.
(2)Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition, The Netherlands.

This study tested the relation between cortical-subcortical functional 
connectivity and alcohol consumption in adolescents using an accelerated 
longitudinal design, as well as normative developmental patterns for these 
measures. Participants between ages 8 and 27 completed resting-state 
neuroimaging scans at two time points separated by two years (N = 274 at T1, 
N = 231 at T2). In addition, participants between ages 12 and 27 reported on 
recent and lifetime alcohol use (N = 193 at T1, N = 244 at T2). Resting-state 
connectivity analyses focused on amygdala-orbitofrontal connectivity given prior 
research linking reduced coupling between these regions to alcohol use. Mixed 
model analyses revealed that age had a cubic relationship with alcohol use, with 
little to no use in childhood, steep increases in adolescence and leveling off 
in adulthood. No age effects were found for amygdala-OFC connectivity. 
Prediction analyses showed that left amygdala-orbitofrontal connectivity at the 
first time point predicted recent and lifetime alcohol use two years later. 
There was no evidence for the reversed relation, suggesting that brain 
connectivity measures precede explorative risk-taking behavior in adolescence, 
possibly because decreased subcortical-frontal connectivity biases towards more 
explorative or risky behavior.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12448
PMID: 27774764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1446. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):992-998. doi: 10.1111/desc.12340. Epub 2015 Nov 27.

Testing enhances subsequent learning in older but not in younger elementary 
school children.

Aslan A(1)(2), Bäuml KT(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, Regensburg University, Germany. 
alp.aslan@psych.uni-halle.de.
(2)Department of Psychology, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany. 
alp.aslan@psych.uni-halle.de.
(3)Department of Experimental Psychology, Regensburg University, Germany.

In adults, testing can enhance subsequent learning by reducing interference from 
the tested information. Here, we examined this forward effect of testing in 
children. Younger and older elementary school children and adult controls 
studied four lists of items in anticipation of a final cumulative recall test. 
Following presentation of each of the first three lists, participants were 
immediately tested on the respective list, or the list was re-presented for 
additional study. Results revealed that, compared to additional study, immediate 
testing of Lists 1-3 enhanced memory for the subsequently studied List 4 in 
adults and older elementary school children, but not in younger elementary 
school children. The findings indicate that the forward effect of testing is a 
relatively late-maturing phenomenon that develops over middle childhood and is 
still inefficient in the early elementary school years. Together with the 
results of other recent studies, these findings point to a more general problem 
in young children in combating interference.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12340
PMID: 26614638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1447. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):881-891. doi: 10.1111/desc.12347. Epub 2015 Nov 16.

Bilingual enhancements have no socioeconomic boundaries.

Krizman J(1)(2), Skoe E(1)(2), Kraus N(3)(4)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Auditory Neuroscience Laboratory (www.brainvolts.northwestern.edu), 
Northwestern University, USA.
(2)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northwestern University, 
USA.
(3)Auditory Neuroscience Laboratory (www.brainvolts.northwestern.edu), 
Northwestern University, USA. nkraus@northwestern.edu.
(4)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northwestern University, 
USA. nkraus@northwestern.edu.
(5)Institute for Neuroscience, Northwestern University, USA. 
nkraus@northwestern.edu.
(6)Department of Neurobiology and Physiology, Northwestern University, USA. 
nkraus@northwestern.edu.
(7)Department of Otolaryngology, Northwestern University, USA. 
nkraus@northwestern.edu.

To understand how socioeconomic status (SES) and bilingualism simultaneously 
operate on cognitive and sensory function, we examined executive control, 
language skills, and neural processing of sound in adolescents who differed in 
language experience (i.e. English monolingual or Spanish-English bilingual) and 
level of maternal education (a proxy for SES). We hypothesized that experience 
communicating in two languages provides an enriched linguistic environment that 
can bolster neural precision in subcortical auditory processing which, in turn, 
enhances cognitive and linguistic function, regardless of the adolescent's 
socioeconomic standing. Consistent with this, we report that adolescent 
bilinguals of both low and high SES demonstrate more stable neural responses, 
stronger phonemic decoding skills, and heightened executive control, relative to 
their monolingual peers. These results support the argument that bilingualism 
can bolster cognitive and neural function in low-SES children and suggest that 
strengthened neural response consistency provides a biological mechanism through 
which these enhancements occur.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12347
PMID: 26573107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1448. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):918-932. doi: 10.1111/desc.12343. Epub 2015 Oct 9.

Lexical leverage: category knowledge boosts real-time novel word recognition in 
2-year-olds.

Borovsky A(1), Ellis EM(2)(3), Evans JL(3)(4), Elman JL(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Florida State University, USA. 
borovsky@psy.fsu.edu.
(2)Department of Communication Disorders, California State University, USA.
(3)School of Behavioral & Brain Sciences, University of Texas at Dallas, USA.
(4)Center for Research in Language, University of California, San Diego, USA.

Recent research suggests that infants tend to add words to their vocabulary that 
are semantically related to other known words, though it is not clear why this 
pattern emerges. In this paper, we explore whether infants leverage their 
existing vocabulary and semantic knowledge when interpreting novel label-object 
mappings in real time. We initially identified categorical domains for which 
individual 24-month-old infants have relatively higher and lower levels of 
knowledge, irrespective of overall vocabulary size. Next, we taught infants 
novel words in these higher and lower knowledge domains and then asked if their 
subsequent real-time recognition of these items varied as a function of their 
category knowledge. While our participants successfully acquired the novel 
label-object mappings in our task, there were important differences in the way 
infants recognized these words in real time. Namely, infants showed more robust 
recognition of high (vs. low) domain knowledge words. These findings suggest 
that dense semantic structure facilitates early word learning and real-time 
novel word recognition.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12343
PMCID: PMC4826629
PMID: 26452444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1449. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):957-966. doi: 10.1111/desc.12336. Epub 2015 Sep 9.

The influence of power and reason on young Maya children's endorsement of 
testimony.

Castelain T(1)(2)(3), Bernard S(1), Van der Henst JB(2), Mercier H(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Science Centre, University of Neuchâtel, Switzerland.
(2)CNRS, L2C2, Lyon, France.
(3)Universidad de Costa Rica, Instituto de Investigaciones Psicológicas, San 
José, Costa Rica.
(4)Cognitive Science Centre, University of Neuchâtel, Switzerland. 
hugo.mercier@gmail.com.
(5)CNRS, L2C2, Lyon, France. hugo.mercier@gmail.com.

Two important parenting strategies are to impose one's power and to use 
reasoning. The effect of these strategies on children's evaluation of testimony 
has received very little attention. Using the epistemic vigilance framework, we 
predict that when the reasoning cue is strong enough it should overcome the 
power cue. We test this prediction in a population for which anthropological 
data suggest that power is the prominent strategy while reasoning is rarely 
relied on in the interactions with children. In Experiment 1, 4- to 6-year-old 
children from a traditional Maya population are shown to endorse the testimony 
supported by a strong argument over that supported by a weak argument. In 
Experiment 2, the same participants are shown to follow the testimony of a 
dominant over that of a subordinate. The participants are then shown to endorse 
the testimony of a subordinate who provides a strong argument over that of a 
dominant who provides either a weak argument (Experiment 3) or no argument 
(Experiment 4). Thus, when the power and reasoning cues conflict, reasoning 
completely trumps power.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12336
PMID: 26353856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1450. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):1049-1057. doi: 10.1111/desc.12342. Epub 2015 Aug 25.

Infants' unprovoked acts of force toward others.

Dahl A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Santa Cruz, USA. 
dahl@ucsc.edu.

Infants harm others at higher rates than older children and adults. A common 
explanation is that infants fail to regulate their frustration, becoming 
aggressive when they do not get what they want. The present research 
investigated whether infants also use force against others without provocation, 
for instance because they seek to explore the consequences of hitting or try to 
pet someone using too much force. Two studies with infants aged 11 to 24 months 
investigated infants' use of force against others in everyday life using 
maternal report (Study 1) and direct observation (Study 2). In both studies, a 
large proportion of infants' acts of force were unprovoked and occurred without 
signs of infant distress. Unlike provoked acts, unprovoked acts showed a 
decrease late in the second year and were positively associated with reports of 
infant pleasure-proneness. The presence of unprovoked acts of harm may reflect 
that infants' actions are not reliably guided by an aversion for harming others 
and may provide unique opportunities for early moral development.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12342
PMCID: PMC4999349
PMID: 26308239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1451. Dev Sci. 2016 Nov;19(6):967-981. doi: 10.1111/desc.12338. Epub 2015 Aug 11.

Developmental changes between childhood and adulthood in passive observational 
and interactive feedback-based categorization rule learning.

Hammer R(1)(2), Kloet J(3), Booth JR(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northwestern University, 
USA. rubi.hammer@northwestern.edu.
(2)Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Northwestern University, USA. 
rubi.hammer@northwestern.edu.
(3)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northwestern University, 
USA.
(4)Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Northwestern University, USA.
(5)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, The University of Texas 
at Austin, USA.

As children start attending school they are more likely to face situations where 
they have to autonomously learn about novel object categories (e.g. by reading a 
picture book with descriptions of novel animals). Such autonomous observational 
category learning (OCL) gradually complements interactive feedback-based 
category learning (FBCL), where a child hypothesizes about the nature of a novel 
object, acts based on his prediction, and then receives feedback indicating the 
correctness of his prediction. Here we tested OCL and FBCL skills of elementary 
school children and adults. In both conditions, participants performed complex 
rule-based categorization tasks that required associating novel objects with 
novel category-labels. We expected children to perform better in FBCL tasks than 
in OCL tasks, whereas adults to be skilled in both tasks. As hypothesized, in 
early-phase learning children performed better in FBCL tasks than in OCL tasks. 
Unexpectedly, adults performed somewhat better in OCL tasks. Early-phase FBCL 
performance in the two age groups was matched, but the OCL performance of adults 
was higher than that of children. In late-phase learning there was only an age 
group main effect (adults > children). Moreover, performance in post-learning 
categorization tasks, that did not require label recollection, indicated that in 
FBCL tasks children were likely to directly learn the associations between an 
object and a category label, whereas in the OCL tasks they were likely to first 
learn which feature-dimensions were relevant. These findings shed light on 
developmental changes in cognitive control and learning mechanisms. Implications 
for educational settings are discussed.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12338
PMID: 26264877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1452. Dev Sci. 2018 Jan;21(1):e12489. doi: 10.1111/desc.12489. Epub 2016 Oct 17.

Longitudinal links between childhood peer acceptance and the neural correlates 
of sharing.

Will GJ(1)(2), Crone EA(1)(2), van Lier PAC(3)(4), Güroğlu B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychology, Leiden University, The Netherlands.
(2)Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition (LIBC), Leiden University, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Developmental Psychology, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Psychology, Education and Child Studies, Erasmus University 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Childhood peer acceptance is associated with high levels of prosocial behavior 
and advanced perspective taking skills. Yet, the neurobiological mechanisms 
underlying these associations have not been studied. This functional magnetic 
resonance imaging study examined the neural correlates of sharing decisions in a 
group of adolescents who had a stable accepted status (n = 27) and a group who 
had a chronic rejected status (n = 19) across six elementary school grades. Both 
groups of adolescents played three allocation games in which they could share 
money with strangers with varying costs and profits to them and the other 
person. Stably accepted adolescents were more likely to share their money with 
unknown others than chronically rejected adolescents when sharing was not 
costly. Neuroimaging analyses showed that stably accepted adolescents, compared 
to chronically rejected adolescents, exhibited higher levels of activation in 
the temporo-parietal junction, posterior superior temporal sulcus, temporal 
pole, pre-supplementary motor area, and anterior insula during costly sharing 
decisions. These findings demonstrate that stable peer acceptance across 
childhood is associated with heightened activity in brain regions previously 
linked to perspective taking and the detection of social norm violations during 
adolescence, and thereby provide insight into processes underlying the widely 
established links between peer acceptance and prosocial behavior.

© 2016 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12489
PMCID: PMC5763347
PMID: 27753220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1453. Dev Sci. 2017 Sep;20(5). doi: 10.1111/desc.12445. Epub 2016 Oct 2.

Implicit and explicit false belief development in preschool children.

Grosse Wiesmann C(1)(2), Friederici AD(1), Singer T(3), Steinbeis N(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and 
Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Berlin School of Mind and Brain, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Germany.
(3)Department of Social Neuroscience, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive 
and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Department of Developmental and Educational Psychology, Universiteit Leiden, 
The Netherlands.

The ability to represent the mental states of other agents is referred to as 
Theory of Mind (ToM). A developmental breakthrough in ToM consists of 
understanding that others can have false beliefs about the world. Recently, 
infants younger than 2 years of age have been shown to pass novel implicit false 
belief tasks. However, the processes underlying these tasks and their relation 
to later-developing explicit false belief understanding, as well as to other 
cognitive abilities, are not yet understood. Here, we study a battery of 
implicit and explicit false belief tasks in 3- and 4-year-old children, relating 
their performance to linguistic abilities and executive functions. The present 
data show a significant developmental change from failing explicit false belief 
tasks at 3 years of age to passing them at the age of 4, while both age groups 
pass implicit false belief tasks. This differential developmental trajectory is 
reflected by the finding that explicit and implicit false belief tasks do not 
correlate. Further, we demonstrate that explicit false belief tasks correlate 
with syntactic and executive functions, whereas implicit false belief tasks do 
not. The study thus indicates that the processes underlying implicit false 
belief tasks are different from later-developing explicit false belief 
understanding. Moreover, our results speak for a critical role of syntactic and 
executive functions for passing standard explicit false belief tasks in contrast 
to implicit tasks.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12445
PMID: 27696613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1454. Dev Sci. 2017 Nov;20(6):10.1111/desc.12459. doi: 10.1111/desc.12459. Epub 2016 
Aug 21.

Mastery of the logic of natural numbers is not the result of mastery of 
counting: evidence from late counters.

Jara-Ettinger J(1), Piantadosi S(2), Spelke ES(3), Levy R(1), Gibson E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, USA.
(2)Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Harvard University, USA.

To master the natural number system, children must understand both the concepts 
that number words capture and the counting procedure by which they are applied. 
These two types of knowledge develop in childhood, but their connection is 
poorly understood. Here we explore the relationship between the mastery of 
counting and the mastery of exact numerical equality (one central aspect of 
natural number) in the Tsimane', a farming-foraging group whose children master 
counting at a delayed age and with higher variability than do children in 
industrialized societies. By taking advantage of this variation, we can better 
understand how counting and exact equality relate to each other, while 
controlling for age and education. We find that the Tsimane' come to understand 
exact equality at later and variable ages. This understanding correlates with 
their mastery of number words and counting, controlling for age and education. 
However, some children who have mastered counting lack an understanding of exact 
equality, and some children who have not mastered counting have achieved this 
understanding. These results suggest that understanding of counting and of 
natural number concepts are at least partially distinct achievements, and that 
both draw on inputs and resources whose distribution and availability differ 
across cultures.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12459
PMCID: PMC5319921
PMID: 27546566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1455. Dev Sci. 2017 Sep;20(5):10.1111/desc.12449. doi: 10.1111/desc.12449. Epub 2016 
Aug 14.

Brain bases of morphological processing in Chinese-English bilingual children.

Ip KI(1), Hsu LS(2), Arredondo MM(1), Tardif T(1)(3), Kovelman I(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(3)Center for Human Growth and Development, University of Michigan, USA.

Can bilingual exposure impact children's neural circuitry for learning to read? 
To answer this question, we investigated the brain bases of morphological 
awareness, one of the key spoken language abilities for learning to read in 
English and Chinese. Bilingual Chinese-English and monolingual English children 
(N = 22, ages 7-12) completed morphological tasks that best characterize each of 
their languages: compound morphology in Chinese (e.g. 
basket + ball = basketball) and derivational morphology in English (e.g. 
re + do = redo). In contrast to monolinguals, bilinguals showed greater 
activation in the left middle temporal region, suggesting that bilingual 
exposure to Chinese impacts the functionality of brain regions supporting 
semantic abilities. Similar to monolinguals, bilinguals showed greater 
activation in the left inferior frontal region [BA 45] in English than Chinese, 
suggesting that young bilinguals form language-specific neural representations. 
The findings offer new insights to inform bilingual and cross-linguistic models 
of language and literacy acquisition.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12449
PMCID: PMC5309206
PMID: 27523024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1456. Dev Sci. 2017 Jul;20(4):e12423. doi: 10.1111/desc.12423. Epub 2016 Aug 6.

Are the literacy difficulties that characterize developmental dyslexia 
associated with a failure to integrate letters and speech sounds?

Nash HM(1), Gooch D(2), Hulme C(2), Mahajan Y(3), McArthur G(4), Steinmetzger 
K(2), Snowling MJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Leeds, UK.
(2)Division of Psychology and Language Sciences, University College, London, UK.
(3)The MARCS Institute, University of Western Sydney, Australia.
(4)ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders, Macquarie 
University, Australia.
(5)St John's College, University of Oxford, UK.

The 'automatic letter-sound integration hypothesis' (Blomert, ) proposes that 
dyslexia results from a failure to fully integrate letters and speech sounds 
into automated audio-visual objects. We tested this hypothesis in a sample of 
English-speaking children with dyslexic difficulties (N = 13) and samples of 
chronological-age-matched (CA; N = 17) and reading-age-matched controls (RA; 
N = 17) aged 7-13 years. Each child took part in two priming experiments in 
which speech sounds were preceded by congruent visual letters (congruent 
condition) or Greek letters (baseline). In a behavioural experiment, responses 
to speech sounds in the two conditions were compared using reaction times. These 
data revealed faster reaction times in the congruent condition in all three 
groups. In a second electrophysiological experiment, responses to speech sounds 
in the two conditions were compared using event-related potentials (ERPs). These 
data revealed a significant effect of congruency on (1) the P1 ERP over left 
frontal electrodes in the CA group and over fronto-central electrodes in the 
dyslexic group and (2) the P2 ERP in the dyslexic and RA control groups. These 
findings suggest that our sample of English-speaking children with dyslexic 
difficulties demonstrate a degree of letter-sound integration that is 
appropriate for their reading level, which challenges the letter-sound 
integration hypothesis.

© 2016 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12423
PMCID: PMC5484094
PMID: 27496263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1457. Dev Sci. 2017 Sep;20(5). doi: 10.1111/desc.12442. Epub 2016 Jun 30.

You get what you give: children's karmic bargaining.

Banerjee K(1), Bloom P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, USA.

Do children believe in karma - the notion that life events occur to punish or 
reward our moral behavior? In three experiments, we investigate 4-6-year-old 
children's willingness to endorse and engage in the practice of performing good 
acts in order to secure an unrelated future desired outcome, so-called 'karmic 
bargaining'. Most children agreed that performing a morally good social 
behavior, but not a morally negative or morally neutral non-social behavior, 
would increase the chances that future desired outcomes would occur, in both 
first-party and third-party contexts. About half of children also engaged in 
karmic bargaining behavior themselves. We conclude that a belief in karma may 
therefore reflect a broad, early-emerging teleological bias to interpret life 
events in terms of agency, purpose, and design.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12442
PMID: 27365179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1458. Dev Sci. 2017 Sep;20(5):10.1111/desc.12438. doi: 10.1111/desc.12438. Epub 2016 
Jun 19.

Adolescent development of insula-dependent interoceptive regulation.

Li D(1), Zucker NL(2), Kragel PA(1), Covington VE(2), LaBar KS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Duke University, USA.

Adolescence is hypothesized to be a critical period for the maturation of 
self-regulatory capacities, including those that depend on interoceptive 
sensitivity, but the neural basis of interoceptive regulation in adolescence is 
unknown. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging and psychophysiology to 
study interoceptive regulation in healthy adolescent females. Participants 
regulated their gut activities in response to a virtual roller coaster by deep 
breathing aided by visually monitoring their online electrogastrogram (EGG) 
activity through a virtual thermometer (i.e. gut biofeedback), or without 
biofeedback. Analyses focused on the insula, given its putative role in 
interoception. The bilateral posterior insula showed increased activation in the 
no-biofeedback compared to biofeedback condition, suggesting that the 
participants relied more on interoceptive input when exteroceptive feedback was 
unavailable. The bilateral dorsal anterior insula showed activation linearly 
associated with age during both induction and regulation, and its activation 
during regulation correlated positively with change of EGG in the tachygastria 
frequency band from induction to regulation. Induction-related activation in the 
bilateral ventral anterior insula was nonlinearly associated with age and peaked 
at mid-adolescence. These results implicate different developmental trajectories 
of distinct sub-regions of the insula in interoceptive processes, with 
implications for competing neurobiological theories of female adolescent 
development.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12438
PMCID: PMC5643158
PMID: 27320796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1459. Dev Sci. 2017 Jul;20(4):10.1111/desc.12411. doi: 10.1111/desc.12411. Epub 2016 
Jun 10.

Napping reduces emotional attention bias during early childhood.

Cremone A(1), Kurdziel LBF(2), Fraticelli-Torres A(3), McDermott JM(#)(1)(2), 
Spencer RMC(#)(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience and Behavior Program, University of Massachusetts Amherst.
(2)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Massachusetts 
Amherst.
(3)Department of Social Sciences, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez.
(#)Contributed equally

Sleep loss alters processing of emotional stimuli in preschool-aged children. 
However, the mechanism by which sleep modifies emotional processing in early 
childhood is unknown. We tested the hypothesis that a nap, compared to an 
equivalent time spent awake, reduces biases in attention allocation to affective 
information. Children (n = 43; M = 55.40 months, SD = 8.05 months) completed a 
Dot Probe task, which provides a measure of attention biases to emotional 
stimuli, following a mid-day nap and an equivalent interval spent awake. No 
emotional attention biases emerged when children napped. However, when 
nap-deprived, children exhibited biases towards negative and positive stimuli. 
This emotional bias after wake was greater in children who napped habitually. 
Gender differences also emerged such that females were more attentive to 
positive emotional stimuli whereas males showed heightened attention to negative 
emotional stimuli, regardless of having napped or not. Moreover, greater slow 
wave activity (SWA) during the nap was associated with faster responding, which 
suggests that SWA may promote efficiency of attention allocation. A video 
abstract of this article can be viewed at: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JIoZ8mzxQgg.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12411
PMCID: PMC5149120
PMID: 27287732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1460. Dev Sci. 2016 Jul;19(4):632-56. doi: 10.1111/desc.12422. Epub 2016 May 4.

Comprehending text versus reading words in young readers with varying reading 
ability: distinct patterns of functional connectivity from common processing 
hubs.

Aboud KS(1), Bailey SK(1), Petrill SA(2), Cutting LE(1).

Author information:
(1)Vanderbilt Brain Institute, Vanderbilt University, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Ohio State University, USA.

Skilled reading depends on recognizing words efficiently in isolation 
(word-level processing; WL) and extracting meaning from text (discourse-level 
processing; DL); deficiencies in either result in poor reading. FMRI has 
revealed consistent overlapping networks in word and passage reading, as well as 
unique regions for DL processing; however, less is known about how WL and DL 
processes interact. Here we examined functional connectivity from seed regions 
derived from where BOLD signal overlapped during word and passage reading in 38 
adolescents ranging in reading ability, hypothesizing that even though certain 
regions support word- and higher-level language, connectivity patterns from 
overlapping regions would be task modulated. Results indeed revealed that the 
left-lateralized semantic and working memory (WM) seed regions showed 
task-dependent functional connectivity patterns: during DL processes, semantic 
and WM nodes all correlated with the left angular gyrus, a region implicated in 
semantic memory/coherence building. In contrast, during WL, these nodes 
coordinated with a traditional WL area (left occipitotemporal region). In 
addition, these WL and DL findings were modulated by decoding and comprehension 
abilities, respectively, with poorer abilities correlating with decreased 
connectivity. Findings indicate that key regions may uniquely contribute to 
multiple levels of reading; we speculate that these connectivity patterns may be 
especially salient for reading outcomes and intervention response.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12422
PMCID: PMC4945471
PMID: 27147257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1461. Dev Sci. 2017 May;20(3). doi: 10.1111/desc.12404. Epub 2016 May 4.

Consequences of 'tiger' parenting: a cross-cultural study of maternal 
psychological control and children's cortisol stress response.

Doan SN(1), Tardif T(2), Miller A(3), Olson S(2), Kessler D(4), Felt B(5), Wang 
L(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Claremont McKenna College, USA.
(2)School of Public Health, University of Michigan, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, USA.
(4)Departments of Psychiatry and Philosophy, University of Michigan, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, University of Michigan, 
USA.
(6)Department of Psychology and Beijing Key Laboratory of Behavior and Mental 
Health, Peking University, China.

Parenting strategies involving psychological control are associated with 
increased adjustment problems in children. However, no research has examined the 
extent to which culture and psychological control predict children's stress 
physiology. We examine cultural differences in maternal psychological control 
and its associations with children's cortisol. Chinese (N = 59) and American 
(N = 45) mother-child dyads participated in the study. Mothers reported on 
psychological control. Children's cortisol was collected during a stressor and 
two indices of Area Under the Curve (AUC) were computed: AUCg which accounts for 
total output, and AUCi, which captures reactivity. Results indicate that Chinese 
mothers reported higher levels of psychological control and Chinese children had 
higher levels of AUCg than their American counterparts. Across both cultures, 
psychological control was significantly associated with increased cortisol 
levels as indexed by AUCg. There were no associations for AUCi. Finally, 
mediation analyses demonstrated that psychological control fully explained 
cultural differences in children's cortisol stress response as indexed by AUCg.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12404
PMID: 27146549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1462. Dev Sci. 2017 May;20(3). doi: 10.1111/desc.12390. Epub 2016 May 4.

Co-occurrence statistics as a language-dependent cue for speech segmentation.

Saksida A(1), Langus A(1), Nespor M(1).

Author information:
(1)Language, Cognition and Development Laboratory, SISSA - International School 
for Advanced Studies, Trieste, Italy.

To what extent can language acquisition be explained in terms of different 
associative learning mechanisms? It has been hypothesized that distributional 
regularities in spoken languages are strong enough to elicit statistical 
learning about dependencies among speech units. Distributional regularities 
could be a useful cue for word learning even without rich language-specific 
knowledge. However, it is not clear how strong and reliable the distributional 
cues are that humans might use to segment speech. We investigate 
cross-linguistic viability of different statistical learning strategies by 
analyzing child-directed speech corpora from nine languages and by modeling 
possible statistics-based speech segmentations. We show that languages vary as 
to which statistical segmentation strategies are most successful. The 
variability of the results can be partially explained by systematic differences 
between languages, such as rhythmical differences. The results confirm previous 
findings that different statistical learning strategies are successful in 
different languages and suggest that infants may have to primarily rely on 
non-statistical cues when they begin their process of speech segmentation.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12390
PMID: 27146310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1463. Dev Sci. 2016 Sep;19(5):834-52. doi: 10.1111/desc.12328. Epub 2016 May 4.

The relationship between spoken language and speech and nonspeech processing in 
children with autism: a magnetic event-related field study.

Yau SH(1), Brock J(1), McArthur G(1).

Author information:
(1)ARC Centre for Cognition and its Disorders, Department of Cognitive Science, 
Macquarie University, Australia.

It has been proposed that language impairments in children with Autism Spectrum 
Disorders (ASD) stem from atypical neural processing of speech and/or nonspeech 
sounds. However, the strength of this proposal is compromised by the unreliable 
outcomes of previous studies of speech and nonspeech processing in ASD. The aim 
of this study was to determine whether there was an association between poor 
spoken language and atypical event-related field (ERF) responses to speech and 
nonspeech sounds in children with ASD (n = 14) and controls (n = 18). Data from 
this developmental population (ages 6-14) were analysed using a novel 
combination of methods to maximize the reliability of our findings while taking 
into consideration the heterogeneity of the ASD population. The results showed 
that poor spoken language scores were associated with atypical left hemisphere 
brain responses (200 to 400 ms) to both speech and nonspeech in the ASD group. 
These data support the idea that some children with ASD may have an immature 
auditory cortex that affects their ability to process both speech and nonspeech 
sounds. Their poor speech processing may impair their ability to process the 
speech of other people, and hence reduce their ability to learn the phonology, 
syntax, and semantics of their native language.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12328
PMID: 27146167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1464. Dev Sci. 2017 Jan;20(1). doi: 10.1111/desc.12429. Epub 2016 Apr 10.

Second label learning in bilingual and monolingual infants.

Kandhadai P(1), Hall DG(1), Werker JF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Canada.

Mutual exclusivity is the assumption that each object has only one category 
label. Prior research suggests that bilingual infants, unlike monolingual 
infants, fail to adhere to this assumption to guide word learning. Yet previous 
work has not addressed whether bilingual infants systematically interpret a 
novel word for a familiar object (i.e. an object with a known category label) as 
a second category label. We addressed this question by exploring bilingual and 
monolingual infants' use of mutual exclusivity in a task in which they heard a 
novel label for a familiar object with a salient color (e.g. an aqua-colored 
dog). They were subsequently tested with two trials that probed whether they 
interpreted the word as a second category label for the object (e.g. another 
word meaning dog) or as a label for one of the object's salient properties, 
namely its color (e.g. a word meaning aqua). Bilingual infants failed to adhere 
to mutual exclusivity and interpreted the novel word systematically as a second 
object category label for the familiar object. In contrast, consistent with 
their use of mutual exclusivity, monolingual infants rejected the novel word as 
a second category label, and instead showed some evidence of interpreting it as 
a property (color) term for the familiar object. The findings suggest that both 
bilingual and monolingual infants are systematic in their interpretation of a 
novel label for a familiar object, but that they show different interpretations 
of that label. We thus argue that theoretical accounts of early word learning 
must consider the crucial role of linguistic experience.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12429
PMID: 27061752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1465. Dev Sci. 2017 May;20(3). doi: 10.1111/desc.12412. Epub 2016 Apr 10.

Eye blink rate predicts reward decisions in adolescents.

Barkley-Levenson E(1), Galván A(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Hofstra University, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
USA.
(3)Brain Research Institute, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
USA.

The ventral striatum displays hyper-responsiveness to reward in adolescents 
relative to other age groups, and animal research on the developmental 
trajectory of the dopaminergic system suggests that dopamine may underlie 
adolescent sensitivity to reward. However, practical limitations prevent the 
direct measurement of dopamine in healthy adolescents. Eye blink rate (EBR) 
shows promise as a proxy measure of striatal dopamine D2 receptor function. We 
investigated developmental differences in the relationship between EBR and 
reward-seeking behavior on a risky decision-making task. Increasing EBR was 
associated with greater reward maximization on the task for adolescent but not 
adult participants. Furthermore, adolescents demonstrated greater sensitivity to 
reward value than adults, as evinced by shifts in decision patterns based on 
increasing potential reward. These findings suggest that previously observed 
adolescent behavioral and neural hypersensitivity to reward may in fact be due 
to greater dopamine receptor activity, as represented by the relationship of 
blink rate and reward-seeking behavior. They also demonstrate the feasibility 
and utility of using EBR as a proxy for dopamine in healthy youth in whom direct 
measurements of dopamine are prohibitively invasive.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12412
PMID: 27061442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1466. Dev Sci. 2017 Jan;20(1):10.1111/desc.12420. doi: 10.1111/desc.12420. Epub 2016 
Mar 21.

Exposure to multiple languages enhances communication skills in infancy.

Liberman Z(1), Woodward AL(1), Keysar B(1), Kinzler KD(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology and Department of Human Development, Cornell 
University, USA.

Early exposure to multiple languages can enhance children's communication 
skills, even when children are effectively monolingual (Fan, Liberman, Keysar & 
Kinzler, ). Here we report evidence that the social benefits of multilingual 
exposure emerge in infancy. Sixteen-month-old infants participated in a 
communication task that required taking a speaker's perspective to understand 
her intended meaning. Infants were presented with two identical toys, such as 
two cars. One toy was mutually visible to both the infant and the speaker, but 
the other was visible only to the infant and was blocked from the speaker's view 
by an opaque barrier. The speaker requested the mutually visible toy and we 
evaluated whether infants understood the speaker's request. Whereas monolingual 
infants were at chance in choosing between the two toys, infants with 
multilingual exposure reliably chose the toy the speaker requested. Successful 
performance was not related to the degree of exposure to other languages, 
suggesting that even minimal multilingual exposure may enhance communication 
skills.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12420
PMCID: PMC5031504
PMID: 27002779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1467. Dev Sci. 2017 Mar;20(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12415. Epub 2016 Mar 7.

Conceptual constraints and mechanisms in children's selective learning.

Sabbagh MA(1), Koenig MA(2), Kuhlmeier VA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Queen's University, Canada.
(2)Institute of Child Development, University of Minnesota, USA.

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2017 Mar;20(2):

Comment on
    Dev Sci. 2017 Mar;20(2):

Although we can support Heyes' call for more research on mechanisms, we disagree 
that the problem has been ignored as Heyes suggests. We also doubt that basic 
learning mechanisms are alone sufficient to account for the broad range of 
findings in the selective social learning literature. Although phylogenetically 
shared learning mechanisms must support selective social learning, we believe 
that they must also be guided by top-down conceptual considerations that may be 
special to humans. Research to date has been focused on establishing the 
boundary conditions on selective social learning, with the goal of making 
generalizations that will constrain theorizing about the character of that 
special knowledge. This is critical to our understanding of both why and how 
selective social learning manifests in children.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12415
PMID: 26949919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1468. Dev Sci. 2017 Mar;20(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12393. Epub 2016 Mar 6.

Brain responses reveal that infants' face discrimination is guided by 
statistical learning from distributional information.

Altvater-Mackensen N(1), Jessen S(1), Grossmann T(2).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, USA.

Infants' perception of faces becomes attuned to the environment during the first 
year of life. However, the mechanisms that underpin perceptual narrowing for 
faces are only poorly understood. Considering the developmental similarities 
seen in perceptual narrowing for faces and speech and the role that statistical 
learning has been shown to play for speech, the current study examined whether 
and how learning from distributional information impacts face identity 
discrimination. We familiarized 6.5-month-old infants with exemplars of female 
faces taken from a morphed continuum going from one identity to another. Using 
event-related brain potentials (ERPs), we show that only infants who were 
familiarized with a bimodal frequency distribution, but not infants familiarized 
with a unimodal frequency distribution, discriminated between identities. These 
results are the first to demonstrate the influence of probabilistic information 
on infants' face identity discrimination, suggesting that statistical learning 
contributes to perceptual attunement for both faces and language.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12393
PMID: 26946075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1469. Dev Sci. 2017 May;20(3). doi: 10.1111/desc.12398. Epub 2016 Feb 21.

Preschoolers have better long-term memory for rhyming text than adults.

Király I(1)(2), Takács S(1)(2), Kaldy Z(3), Blaser E(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Psychology, Eötvös Loránd University, Hungary.
(2)Institute for Advanced Study, Central European University, Hungary.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts Boston, USA.

The dominant view of children's memory is that it is slow to develop and is 
inferior to adults'. Here we pitted 4-year-old children against adults in a test 
of verbatim recall of verbal material. Parents read a novel rhyming verse (and 
an integrated word list) as their child's bedtime story on ten consecutive days. 
A group of young adults listened to the verse, matching the exposure of 
children. All participants subsequently performed a free-recall of the verse, 
verbatim. (Parents and young adults knew they would be tested; children did 
not.) Four-year-olds significantly outperformed both their parents and the young 
adults. There were no significant differences in the ability to recall the gist 
of the verse, nor the integrated word list, allaying concerns about differences 
in engagement or motivation. Verbatim recall of verse is a skill amenable to 
practice, and children, we argue, by virtue of the prominence of verse in their 
culture and their reliance on oral transmission, have honed this skill to exceed 
adults'.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12398
PMID: 26899178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1470. Dev Sci. 2017 May;20(3). doi: 10.1111/desc.12387. Epub 2016 Jan 29.

Cultural differences in self-recognition: the early development of autonomous 
and related selves?

Ross J(1), Yilmaz M(2), Dale R(3), Cassidy R(1), Yildirim I(1), Suzanne Zeedyk 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Psychology, University of Dundee, Scotland.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Chester, UK.
(3)Wolf Science Centre, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria.

Fifteen- to 18-month-old infants from three nationalities were observed 
interacting with their mothers and during two self-recognition tasks. Scottish 
interactions were characterized by distal contact, Zambian interactions by 
proximal contact, and Turkish interactions by a mixture of contact strategies. 
These culturally distinct experiences may scaffold different perspectives on 
self. In support, Scottish infants performed best in a task requiring 
recognition of the self in an individualistic context (mirror self-recognition), 
whereas Zambian infants performed best in a task requiring recognition of the 
self in a less individualistic context (body-as-obstacle task). Turkish infants 
performed similarly to Zambian infants on the body-as-obstacle task, but 
outperformed Zambians on the mirror self-recognition task. Verbal contact (a 
distal strategy) was positively related to mirror self-recognition and 
negatively related to passing the body-as-obstacle task. Directive action and 
speech (proximal strategies) were negatively related to mirror self-recognition. 
Self-awareness performance was best predicted by cultural context; autonomous 
settings predicted success in mirror self-recognition, and related settings 
predicted success in the body-as-obstacle task. These novel data substantiate 
the idea that cultural factors may play a role in the early expression of 
self-awareness. More broadly, the results highlight the importance of moving 
beyond the mark test, and designing culturally sensitive tests of 
self-awareness.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12387
PMID: 26825413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1471. Dev Sci. 2017 Mar;20(2):10.1111/desc.12391. doi: 10.1111/desc.12391. Epub 2016 
Jan 19.

Patterns of attention to threat across tasks in behaviorally inhibited children 
at risk for anxiety.

Morales S(1), Taber-Thomas BC(1), Pérez-Edgar KE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State University, USA.

Although attention bias towards threat has been causally implicated in the 
development and maintenance of fear and anxiety, the expected associations do 
not appear consistently. Reliance on a single task to capture attention bias, in 
this case overwhelmingly the dot-probe task, may contribute to this 
inconsistency. Comparing across attentional bias measures could help capture 
patterns of behavior that have implications for anxiety. This study examines the 
patterns of attentional bias across two related measures in a sample of children 
at temperamental risk for anxiety. Children (Meanage = 10.19 ± 0.96) 
characterized as behaviorally inhibited (N = 50) or non-inhibited (N = 64) via 
parent-report completed the dot-probe and affective Posner tasks to measure 
attentional bias to threat. Parent-report diagnostic interviews assessed 
children's social anxiety. Behavioral inhibition was not associated with 
performance in the dot-probe task, but was associated with increased attentional 
bias to threat in the affective Posner task. Cross-task convergence was 
dependent on temperament, such that attention bias across the two tasks was only 
related in behaviorally inhibited children. Finally, children who were 
consistently biased across tasks (showing high or low attentional bias scores in 
both tasks, rather than high in one but low in the other) had higher levels of 
anxiety. Convergence across attention bias measures may be dependent on 
individuals' predispositions (e.g. temperament). Moreover, convergence of 
attention bias across measures may be a stronger marker of information 
processing patterns that shape socioemotional outcomes than performance in a 
single task.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12391
PMCID: PMC4955713
PMID: 26786586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1472. Dev Sci. 2017 May;20(3):10.1111/desc.12378. doi: 10.1111/desc.12378. Epub 2015 
Dec 21.

Early childhood cortisol reactivity moderates the effects of parent-child 
relationship quality on the development of children's temperament in early 
childhood.

Kopala-Sibley DC(1), Dougherty LR(2), Dyson MW(3), Laptook RS(4), Olino TM(5), 
Bufferd SJ(6), Klein DN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stony Brook University, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Maryland, College Park, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, USA.
(4)Departments of Psychiatry and Pediatrics, Warren Alpert Medical School of 
Brown University, USA.
(5)Department of Psychology, Temple University, USA.
(6)Department of Psychology, California State University, San Marcos, USA.

Positive parenting has been related both to lower cortisol reactivity and more 
adaptive temperament traits in children, whereas elevated cortisol reactivity 
may be related to maladaptive temperament traits, such as higher negative 
emotionality (NE) and lower positive emotionality (PE). However, no studies have 
examined whether hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity, as measured by 
cortisol reactivity, moderates the effect of the quality of the parent-child 
relationship on changes in temperament in early childhood. In this study, 126 
3-year-olds were administered the Laboratory Temperament Assessment Battery 
(Lab-TAB; Goldsmith et al., 1995) as a measure of temperamental NE and PE. 
Salivary cortisol was collected from the child at 4 time points during this 
task. The primary parent and the child completed the Teaching Tasks battery 
(Egeland et al., 1995), from which the quality of the relationship was coded. At 
age 6, children completed the Lab-TAB again. From age 3 to 6, adjusting for age 
3 PE or NE, a better quality relationship with their primary parent predicted 
decreases in NE for children with elevated cortisol reactivity and predicted 
increases in PE for children with low cortisol reactivity. Results have 
implications for our understanding of the interaction of biological stress 
systems and the parent-child relationship in the development of temperament in 
childhood.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12378
PMCID: PMC5263216
PMID: 26689860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1473. Dev Sci. 2017 Mar;20(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12368. Epub 2015 Dec 8.

Children with autism are impaired in the understanding of teaching.

Knutsen J(1)(2), Mandell DS(3), Frye D(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, USA.
(2)Division of General Academic Pediatrics, Massachusetts General Hospital, USA.
(3)Center for Mental Health Policy & Services Research, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Division of Applied Psychology and Human Development, Graduate School of 
Education, University of Pennsylvania, USA.

Children learn novel information using various methods, and one of the most 
common is human pedagogical communication or teaching - the purposeful imparting 
of information from one person to another. Neuro-typically developing (TD) 
children gain the ability to recognize and understand teaching as a core method 
for acquiring knowledge from others. However, it is not known when children with 
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) acquire the ability to recognize and understand 
teaching. This study (total N = 70) examined whether children with ASD recognize 
the two central elements that define teaching: (1) that teaching is an 
intentional activity; and (2) that teaching requires a knowledge difference 
between teacher and learner. Theory of mind understanding was also tested. 
Compared to individually matched TD children, high cognitively functioning 
children with ASD were impaired in their comprehension of both components of 
teaching understanding, and their performance was correlated with theory of mind 
understanding. These findings could have broad implications for explaining 
learning in children with autism, and could help in designing more effective 
interventions, which could ultimately lead to improved learning outcomes for 
everyday life skills, school performance, health, and overall well-being.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12368
PMID: 26646799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1474. Dev Sci. 2017 May;20(3). doi: 10.1111/desc.12374. Epub 2015 Nov 27.

Auditory and proprioceptive spatial impairments in blind children and adults.

Cappagli G(1), Cocchi E(2), Gori M(1).

Author information:
(1)Robotics, Brain and Cognitive Sciences Department, Fondazione Istituto 
Italiano di Tecnologia, Genoa, Italy.
(2)Istituto David Chiossone Onlus, Genoa, Italy.

It is not clear what role visual information plays in the development of space 
perception. It has previously been shown that in absence of vision, both the 
ability to judge orientation in the haptic modality and bisect intervals in the 
auditory modality are severely compromised (Gori, Sandini, Martinoli & Burr, 
2010; Gori, Sandini, Martinoli & Burr, 2014). Here we report for the first time 
also a strong deficit in proprioceptive reproduction and audio distance 
evaluation in early blind children and adults. Interestingly, the deficit is not 
present in a small group of adults with acquired visual disability. Our results 
support the idea that in absence of vision the audio and proprioceptive spatial 
representations may be delayed or drastically weakened due to the lack of visual 
calibration over the auditory and haptic modalities during the critical period 
of development.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12374
PMID: 26613827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1475. Dev Sci. 2017 Mar;20(2):10.1111/desc.12349. doi: 10.1111/desc.12349. Epub 2015 
Nov 17.

Beyond naïve cue combination: salience and social cues in early word learning.

Yurovsky D(1), Frank MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, USA.

Children learn their earliest words through social interaction, but it is 
unknown how much they rely on social information. Some theories argue that word 
learning is fundamentally social from its outset, with even the youngest infants 
understanding intentions and using them to infer a social partner's target of 
reference. In contrast, other theories argue that early word learning is largely 
a perceptual process in which young children map words onto salient objects. One 
way of unifying these accounts is to model word learning as weighted cue 
combination, in which children attend to many potential cues to reference, but 
only gradually learn the correct weight to assign each cue. We tested four 
predictions of this kind of naïve cue combination account, using an eye-tracking 
paradigm that combines social word teaching and two-alternative forced-choice 
testing. None of the predictions were supported. We thus propose an alternative 
unifying account: children are sensitive to social information early, but their 
ability to gather and deploy this information is constrained by domain-general 
cognitive processes. Developmental changes in children's use of social cues 
emerge not from learning the predictive power of social cues, but from the 
gradual development of attention, memory, and speed of information processing.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12349
PMCID: PMC4870162
PMID: 26575408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1476. Dev Sci. 2016 Sep;19(5):790-802. doi: 10.1111/desc.12326. Epub 2015 Nov 8.

Relation of infant motor development with nonverbal intelligence, language 
comprehension and neuropsychological functioning in childhood: a 
population-based study.

Serdarevic F(1)(2), van Batenburg-Eddes T(2)(3), Mous SE(1)(2), White T(2)(4), 
Hofman A(5), Jaddoe VW(1)(5)(6), Verhulst FC(2), Ghassabian A(1)(2), Tiemeier 
H(2)(5)(7).

Author information:
(1)The Generation R Study Group, Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Erasmus Medical Center-Sophia 
Children's Hospital Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Educational Neuroscience, VU Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Radiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Erasmus Medical Center-Sophia Children's Hospital 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Within a population-based study of 3356 children, we investigated whether infant 
neuromotor development was associated with cognition in early childhood. 
Neuromotor development was examined with an adapted version of Touwen's 
Neurodevelopmental Examination between 9 and 20 weeks. Parents rated their 
children's executive functioning at 4 years. At age 6 years, children performed 
intelligence and language comprehension tests, using Dutch test batteries. At 
age 6-9 years, neuropsychological functioning was assessed in 486 children using 
the validated NEPSY-II-NL test battery. We showed that less optimal 
neurodevelopment in infancy may predict poor mental rotation, immediate memory, 
shifting, and planning; but not nonverbal intelligence or language 
comprehension.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12326
PMID: 26549804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1477. Dev Sci. 2017 Mar;20(2). doi: 10.1111/desc.12354. Epub 2015 Oct 27.

Preschool children's control of action outcomes.

Freier L(1), Cooper RP(2), Mareschal D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Department of Psychological 
Sciences, Birkbeck University of London, UK.
(2)Centre for Cognition, Computation and Modelling, Department of Psychological 
Sciences, Birkbeck University of London, UK.

Naturalistic goal-directed behaviours require the engagement and maintenance of 
appropriate levels of cognitive control over relatively extended intervals of 
time. In two experiments, we examined preschool children's abilities to maintain 
top-down control throughout the course of a sequential task. Both 3- and 
5-year-olds demonstrated good abilities to access goals at the lowest level of 
the representational hierarchy. However, only 5-year-olds consistently aligned 
their response choices with goals at superordinate levels. These findings 
suggest that the ability to maintain top-down control and adjust behavioural 
responses according to goals at multiple levels of abstraction undergoes a 
marked improvement throughout the preschool period. Results are discussed in 
relation to current accounts of cognitive control and the monitoring of conflict 
in sequential action.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12354
PMID: 26507683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1478. Dev Sci. 2017 Mar;20(2):10.1111/desc.12355. doi: 10.1111/desc.12355. Epub 2015 
Oct 21.

Difficult temperament and negative parenting in early childhood: a genetically 
informed cross-lagged analysis.

Micalizzi L(1), Wang M(1), Saudino KJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Boston University, USA.

A genetically informed longitudinal cross-lagged model was applied to twin data 
to explore etiological links between difficult temperament and negative 
parenting in early childhood. The sample comprised 313 monozygotic (MZ) and 
dizygotic (DZ) twin pairs. Difficult temperament and negative parenting were 
assessed at ages 2 and 3 using parent ratings. Both constructs were interrelated 
within and across age (rs .34-.47) and showed substantial stability (rs 
.65-.68). Difficult temperament and negative parenting were influenced by 
genetic and environmental factors at ages 2 and 3. The genetic and nonshared 
environmental correlations (rs .21-.76) at both ages suggest overlap at the 
level of etiology between the phenotypes. Significant bidirectional associations 
between difficult temperament and negative parenting were found. The 
cross-lagged association from difficult temperament at age 2 to negative 
parenting at age 3 and from negative parenting at age 2 and difficult 
temperament at age 3 were due to genetic, shared environmental, and nonshared 
environmental factors. Substantial novel genetic and nonshared environmental 
influences emerged at age 3 and suggest change in the etiology of these 
constructs over time.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12355
PMCID: PMC4840089
PMID: 26490166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1479. Dev Sci. 2016 May;19(3):513-20. doi: 10.1111/desc.12332. Epub 2015 Aug 11.

The irreversibility of sensitive period effects in language development: 
evidence from second language acquisition in international adoptees.

Norrman G(1), Bylund E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Research on Bilingualism, Stockholm University, Sweden.
(2)Department of Swedish, Linnaeus University, Sweden.

The question of a sensitive period in language acquisition has been subject to 
extensive research and debate for more than half a century. While it has been 
well established that the ability to learn new languages declines in early 
years, the extent to which this outcome depends on biological maturation in 
contrast to previously acquired knowledge remains disputed. In the present 
study, we addressed this question by examining phonetic discriminatory abilities 
in early second language (L2) speakers of Swedish, who had either maintained 
their first language (L1) (immigrants) or had lost it (international adoptees), 
using native speaker controls. Through this design, we sought to disentangle the 
effects of the maturational state of the learner on L2 development from the 
effects of L1 interference: if additional language development is indeed 
constrained by an interfering L1, then adoptees should outperform immigrant 
speakers. The results of an auditory lexical decision task, in which fine vowel 
distinctions in Swedish had been modified, showed, however, no difference 
between the L2 groups. Instead, both L2 groups scored significantly lower than 
the native speaker group. The three groups did not differ in their ability to 
discriminate non-modified words. These findings demonstrate that L1 loss is not 
a crucial condition for successfully acquiring an L2, which in turn is taken as 
support for a maturational constraints view on L2 acquisition. A video abstract 
of this article can be viewed at: https://youtu.be/1J9X50aePeU.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12332
PMID: 26264762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1480. Dev Sci. 2016 May;19(3):427-39. doi: 10.1111/desc.12322. Epub 2015 Jul 17.

Risky visuomotor choices during rapid reaching in childhood.

Dekker TM(1), Nardini M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Visual Neuroscience, University College London Institute of 
Ophthalmology, UK.
(2)Department of Psychology, Durham University, UK.

Many everyday actions are implicit gambles because imprecisions in our 
visuomotor systems place probabilities on our success or failure. Choosing 
optimal action strategies involves weighting the costs and gains of potential 
outcomes by their corresponding probabilities, and requires stable 
representations of one's own imprecisions. How this ability is acquired during 
development in childhood when visuomotor skills change drastically is unknown. 
In a rewarded rapid reaching task, 6- to 11-year-old children followed 
'risk-seeking' strategies leading to overly high point-loss. Adults' 
performance, in contrast, was close to optimal. Children's errors were not 
explained by distorted estimates of value or probability, but may reflect 
different action selection criteria or immature integration of value and 
probability information while planning movements. These findings provide a 
starting point for understanding children's risk-taking in everyday visuomotor 
situations when suboptimal choices can be dangerous. Moreover, children's risky 
visuomotor decisions mirror those reported for non-motor gambles, raising the 
possibility that common processes underlie development across decision-making 
domains.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12322
PMCID: PMC4975720
PMID: 26190343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1481. Dev Sci. 2016 May;19(3):469-87. doi: 10.1111/desc.12316. Epub 2015 Jul 17.

Neuro-oscillatory mechanisms of intersensory selective attention and task 
switching in school-aged children, adolescents and young adults.

Murphy JW(1)(2), Foxe JJ(1)(2)(3), Molholm S(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)The Sheryl and Daniel R. Tishman Cognitive Neurophysiology Laboratory, 
Children's Evaluation and Rehabilitation Center (CERC), Department of 
Pediatrics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine & Montefiore Medical Center, New 
York, USA.
(2)Program in Cognitive Neuroscience, The Graduate Center of the City University 
of New York, USA.
(3)The Dominick P. Purpura Department of Neuroscience, Rose F. Kennedy 
Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research Center, Albert Einstein 
College of Medicine, New York, USA.

The ability to attend to one among multiple sources of information is central to 
everyday functioning. Just as central is the ability to switch attention among 
competing inputs as the task at hand changes. Such processes develop 
surprisingly slowly, such that even into adolescence, we remain slower and more 
error prone at switching among tasks compared to young adults. The amplitude of 
oscillations in the alpha band (~8-14 Hz) tracks the top-down deployment of 
attention, and there is growing evidence that alpha can act as a suppressive 
mechanism to bias attention away from distracting sensory input. Moreover, the 
amplitude of alpha has also been shown to be sensitive to the demands of 
switching tasks. To understand the neural basis of protracted development of 
these executive functions, we recorded high-density electrophysiology from 
school-aged children (8-12 years), adolescents (13-17), and young adults (18-34) 
as they performed a cued inter-sensory selective attention task. The youngest 
participants showed increased susceptibility to distracting inputs that was 
especially evident when switching tasks. Concordantly, they showed weaker and 
delayed onset of alpha modulation compared to the older groups. Thus the 
flexible and efficient deployment of alpha to bias competition among attentional 
sets remains underdeveloped in school-aged children.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12316
PMCID: PMC5361894
PMID: 26190204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1482. Dev Sci. 2016 May;19(3):394-401. doi: 10.1111/desc.12315. Epub 2015 Jun 12.

Small on the left, large on the right: numbers orient visual attention onto 
space in preverbal infants.

Bulf H(1)(2), de Hevia MD(3)(4)(5), Macchi Cassia V(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Milano-Bicocca, Italy.
(2)Milan Center for Neuroscience (NeuroMI), Italy.
(3)Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(4)CNRS UMR 8242, Laboratoire Psychologie de la Perception, Paris, France.
(5)INSERM, U992, Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

Numbers are represented as ordered magnitudes along a spatially oriented number 
line. While culture and formal education modulate the direction of this 
number-space mapping, it is a matter of debate whether its emergence is entirely 
driven by cultural experience. By registering 8-9-month-old infants' eye 
movements, this study shows that numerical cues are critical in orienting 
infants' visual attention towards a peripheral region of space that is congruent 
with the number's relative position on a left-to-right oriented representational 
continuum. This finding provides the first direct evidence that, in humans, the 
association between numbers and oriented spatial codes occurs before the 
acquisition of symbols or exposure to formal education, suggesting that the 
number line is not merely a product of human invention.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12315
PMID: 26074348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1483. Dev Sci. 2016 May;19(3):402-18. doi: 10.1111/desc.12313. Epub 2015 Jun 2.

Identifying learning patterns of children at risk for Specific Reading 
Disability.

Barbot B(1)(2), Krivulskaya S(3), Hein S(2), Reich J(2)(4), Thuma PE(5), 
Grigorenko EL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Pace University, New York, USA.
(2)Child Study Center, Yale University, USA.
(3)Department of History, Washington University in St. Louis, USA.
(4)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Temple University, USA.
(5)Macha Research Trust, Macha, Zambia.

Differences in learning patterns of vocabulary acquisition in children at risk 
(+SRD) and not at risk (-SRD) for Specific Reading Disability (SRD) were 
examined using a microdevelopmental paradigm applied to the multi-trial Foreign 
Language Learning Task (FLLT; Baddeley et al., 1995). The FLLT was administered 
to 905 children from rural Chitonga-speaking Zambia. A multi-group Latent Growth 
Curve Model (LGCM) was implemented to study interindividual differences in 
intraindividual change across trials. Results showed that the +SRD group 
recalled fewer words correctly in the first trial, learned at a slower rate 
during the subsequent trials, and demonstrated a more linear learning pattern 
compared to the -SRD group. This study illustrates the promise of LGCM applied 
to multi-trial learning tasks, by isolating three components of the learning 
process (initial recall, rate of learning, and functional pattern of learning). 
Implications of this microdevelopmental approach to SRD research in 
low-to-middle income countries are discussed.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12313
PMCID: PMC4751058
PMID: 26037654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1484. Dev Sci. 2016 Mar;19(2):251-74. doi: 10.1111/desc.12309. Epub 2015 May 24.

A mathematical model of the evolution of individual differences in developmental 
plasticity arising through parental bet-hedging.

Frankenhuis WE(1), Panchanathan K(2), Belsky J(3).

Author information:
(1)Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Anthropology, University of Missouri, USA.
(3)Human Ecology, University of California, Davis, USA.

Children vary in the extent to which their development is shaped by particular 
experiences (e.g. maltreatment, social support). This variation raises a 
question: Is there no single level of plasticity that maximizes biological 
fitness? One influential hypothesis states that when different levels of 
plasticity are optimal in different environmental states and the environment 
fluctuates unpredictably, natural selection may favor parents producing 
offspring with varying levels of plasticity. The current article presents a 
mathematical model assessing the logic of this hypothesis--specifically, it 
examines what conditions are required for natural selection to favor parents to 
bet-hedge by varying their offspring's plasticity. Consistent with existing 
theory from biology, results show that between-individual variation in 
plasticity cannot evolve when the environment only varies across space. If, 
however, the environment varies across time, selection can favor differential 
plasticity, provided fitness effects are large (i.e. variation in individuals' 
plasticity is correlated with substantial variation in fitness). Our model also 
generates a novel restriction: Differential plasticity only evolves when the 
cost of being mismatched to the environment exceeds the benefits of being well 
matched. Based on mechanistic considerations, we argue that bet-hedging by 
varying offspring plasticity, if it were to evolve, would be more likely 
instantiated via epigenetic mechanisms (e.g. pre- or postnatal developmental 
programming) than genetic ones (e.g. mating with genetically diverse partners). 
Our model suggests novel avenues for testing the bet-hedging hypothesis of 
differential plasticity, including empirical predictions and relevant measures. 
We also discuss several ways in which future work might extend our model.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12309
PMID: 26010335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1485. Dev Sci. 2016 May;19(3):504-12. doi: 10.1111/desc.12306. Epub 2015 May 1.

Investigating cognitive transfer within the framework of music practice: genetic 
pleiotropy rather than causality.

Mosing MA(1)(2), Madison G(3), Pedersen NL(2), Ullén F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden.
(2)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institute, 
Sweden.
(3)Department of Psychology, Umeå University, Sweden.

The idea of far transfer effects in the cognitive sciences has received much 
attention in recent years. One domain where far transfer effects have frequently 
been reported is music education, with the prevailing idea that music practice 
entails an increase in cognitive ability (IQ). While cross-sectional studies 
consistently find significant associations between music practice and IQ, 
randomized controlled trials, however, report mixed results. An alternative to 
the hypothesis of cognitive transfer effects is that some underlying factors, 
such as shared genes, influence practice behaviour and IQ causing associations 
on the phenotypic level. Here we explored the hypothesis of far transfer within 
the framework of music practice. A co-twin control design combined with 
classical twin-modelling based on a sample of more than 10,500 twins was used to 
explore causal associations between music practice and IQ as well as underlying 
genetic and environmental influences. As expected, phenotypic associations were 
moderate (r = 0.11 and r = 0.10 for males and females, respectively). However, 
the relationship disappeared when controlling for genetic and shared 
environmental influences using the co-twin control method, indicating that a 
highly practiced twin did not have higher IQ than the untrained co-twin. In line 
with that finding, the relationship between practice and IQ was mostly due to 
shared genetic influences. Findings strongly suggest that associations between 
music practice and IQ in the general population are non-causal in nature. The 
implications of the present findings for research on plasticity, modularity, and 
transfer are discussed.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12306
PMID: 25939545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1486. Dev Sci. 2016 May;19(3):362-71. doi: 10.1111/desc.12301. Epub 2015 Apr 20.

Narrowing in categorical responding to other-race face classes by infants.

Quinn PC(1), Lee K(2), Pascalis O(3), Tanaka JW(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Delaware, USA.
(2)Department of Applied Psychology and Human Development, University of 
Toronto, Canada.
(3)LPNC, Université Grenoble Alpes, France.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Victoria, Canada.

Infants can form object categories based on perceptual cues, but their ability 
to form categories based on differential experience is less clear. Here we 
examined whether infants filter through perceptual differences among faces from 
different other-race classes and represent them as a single other-race class 
different only from own-race faces. We used a familiarization/novelty-preference 
procedure to investigate category formation for two other-race face classes 
(Black vs. Asian) by White 6- and 9-month-olds. The data indicated that while 
White 6-month-olds categorically represented the distinction between Black and 
Asian faces, White 9-month-olds formed a broad other-race category inclusive of 
Black and Asian faces, but exclusive of own-race White faces. The findings 
provide evidence that narrowing can occur for mental processes other than 
discrimination: category formation is also affected. The results suggest that 
frequency of experience with own-race versus other-race classes of faces may 
propel infants to contrast own-race faces with other-race faces, but not 
different classes of other-race faces with each other.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12301
PMID: 25899938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1487. Dev Sci. 2016 Mar;19(2):275-83. doi: 10.1111/desc.12304. Epub 2015 Apr 14.

Young children with a positive reputation to maintain are less likely to cheat.

Fu G(1), Heyman GD(1)(2), Qian M(1), Guo T(3), Lee K(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Hangzhou Normal University, PR China.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of California San Diego, USA.
(3)School of Education, Guizhou Normal University, PR China.
(4)Dr Eric Jackman Institute of Child Study, University of Toronto, Canada.

The present study examined whether having a positive reputation to maintain 
makes young children less likely to cheat. Cheating was assessed through a 
temptation resistance paradigm in which participants were instructed not to 
cheat in a guessing game. Across three studies (total N = 361), preschool-aged 
participants were randomly assigned to either a reputation condition, in which 
an experimenter told them that she had learned of their positive reputation from 
classmates, or to a control condition in which they received no such 
information. By age 5, children in the reputation condition cheated less often 
than those in the control condition even though nobody was watching and choosing 
not to cheat conflicted with their personal interest. These findings are the 
first to show that informing children that they have a positive reputation to 
maintain can influence their moral behavior.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12304
PMID: 25872952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1488. Dev Sci. 2016 Jan;19(1):50-62. doi: 10.1111/desc.12295. Epub 2015 Mar 5.

Relations between infants' emerging reach-grasp competence and event-related 
desynchronization in EEG.

Cannon EN(1), Simpson EA(2)(3), Fox NA(1), Vanderwert RE(4), Woodward AL(5), 
Ferrari PF(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology, University of 
Maryland, USA.
(2)Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Università di Parma, Italy.
(3)Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institutes of Child Health and Human 
Development, Poolesville, USA.
(4)Laboratories of Cognitive Neuroscience, Division of Developmental Medicine, 
Children's Hospital Boston, USA.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, USA.

Recent reports of similar patterns of brain electrical activity 
(electroencephalogram: EEG) during action execution and observation, recorded 
from scalp locations over motor-related regions in infants and adults, have 
raised the possibility that two foundational abilities--controlling one's own 
intentional actions and perceiving others' actions--may be integrally related 
during ontogeny. However, to our knowledge, there are no published reports of 
the relations between developments in motor skill (i.e. recording actual motor 
skill performance) and EEG during both action execution and action observation. 
In the present study we collected EEG from 21 9-month-olds who were given 
opportunities to reach for toys and who also observed an experimenter reach for 
toys. Event-related desynchronization (ERD) was computed from the EEG during the 
reaching events. We assessed infants' reaching-grasping competence, including 
reach latency, errors, preshaping of the hand, and bimanual reaches, and found 
that desynchronization recorded in scalp electrodes over motor-related regions 
during action observation was associated with action competence during 
execution. Infants who were more competent reachers, compared to less competent 
reachers, exhibited greater ERD while observing reaching-grasping. These results 
provide initial evidence for an early emerging neural system integrating one's 
own actions with the perception of others' actions.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12295
PMCID: PMC7470427
PMID: 25754667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1489. Dev Sci. 2016 Jan;19(1):32-40. doi: 10.1111/desc.12285. Epub 2015 Mar 5.

Effective learning and retention of braille letter tactile discrimination skills 
in children with developmental dyslexia.

Hayek M(1)(2), Dorfberger S(1)(3), Karni A(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)E.J. Safra Brain Research Centre for the Study of Learning Disabilities, 
University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.
(2)Special Education Department, Sakhnin Colege, Sakhnin, Israel.
(3)Gordon College of Education, Haifa, Israel.
(4)The Department of Human Biology & the Sagol Department of Neurobiology, 
University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.

Children with developmental dyslexia (DD) may differ from typical readers in 
aspects other than reading. The notion of a general deficit in the ability to 
acquire and retain procedural ('how to') knowledge as long-term procedural 
memory has been proposed. Here, we compared the ability of elementary school 
children, with and without reading difficulties (DD, typical readers), to 
improve their tactile discrimination with practice and tested the children's 
ability to retain the gains. Forty 10-11-year-olds practiced the tactile 
discrimination of four braille letters, presented as pairs, while blindfolded. 
In a trial, participants were asked to report whether the target stimuli were 
identical or different from each other. The structured training session 
consisted of six blocks of 16 trials each. Performance was re-tested at 24 hours 
and two weeks post-training. Both groups improved in speed and in accuracy. In 
session 1, children with DD started as significantly less accurate and were 
slower than the typical readers but showed rapid learning and successfully 
closed the gap. Only two children with DD failed to benefit from training and 
were not included in subsequent data analyses. At 24 hours post-training both 
groups showed effective retention of the gains in speed and accuracy. 
Importantly, children with DD were able to retain the gains in speed and 
accuracy, over a two-week interval as effectively as typical readers. Thus, 
children with DD were as effective in the acquisition and retention of tactile 
discrimination of braille letters as typical readers of the same age. The 
results do not support the notion of a general procedural learning disability in 
DD.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12285
PMID: 25754250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1490. Dev Sci. 2016 Jan;19(1):63-75. doi: 10.1111/desc.12289. Epub 2015 Feb 20.

Discourse bootstrapping: preschoolers use linguistic discourse to learn new 
words.

Sullivan J(1), Barner D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Skidmore College, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego, USA.

When children acquire language, they often learn words in the absence of direct 
instruction (e.g. 'This is a ball!') or even social cues to reference (e.g. eye 
gaze, pointing). However, there are few accounts of how children do this, 
especially in cases where the referent of a new word is ambiguous. Across two 
experiments, we test whether preschoolers (2- to 4-year-olds; n = 239) can learn 
new words by inferring the referent of a new word from the surrounding 
linguistic discourse. Across two experiments, we show that children as young as 
2 can learn a new word from the linguistic discourse in which it appears. This 
suggests that children use the linguistic discourse in which a word appears to 
learn new words.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12289
PMID: 25702754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1491. Dev Sci. 2016 Jan;19(1):41-9. doi: 10.1111/desc.12286. Epub 2015 Feb 9.

Vowel bias in Danish word-learning: processing biases are language-specific.

Højen A(1), Nazzi T(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Child Language, Department of Language and Communication, 
University of Southern Denmark, Denmark.
(2)Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, France.
(3)CNRS, Laboratoire Psychologie de la Perception, Paris, France.

The present study explored whether the phonological bias favoring consonants 
found in French-learning infants and children when learning new words (Havy & 
Nazzi, 2009; Nazzi, 2005) is language-general, as proposed by Nespor, Peña and 
Mehler (2003), or varies across languages, perhaps as a function of the 
phonological or lexical properties of the language in acquisition. To do so, we 
used the interactive word-learning task set up by Havy and Nazzi (2009), 
teaching Danish-learning 20-month-olds pairs of phonetically similar words that 
contrasted either on one of their consonants or one of their vowels, by either 
one or two phonological features. Danish was chosen because it has more vowels 
than consonants, and is characterized by extensive consonant lenition. Both 
phenomena could disfavor a consonant bias. Evidence of word-learning was found 
only for vocalic information, irrespective of whether one or two phonological 
features were changed. The implication of these findings is that the 
phonological biases found in early lexical processing are not language-general 
but develop during language acquisition, depending on the phonological or 
lexical properties of the native language.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12286
PMID: 25660116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1492. Dev Sci. 2015 Sep;18(5):815-23. doi: 10.1111/desc.12249. Epub 2015 Feb 9.

Think fast! The relationship between goal prediction speed and social competence 
in infants.

Krogh-Jespersen S(1), Liberman Z(1), Woodward AL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, USA.

Skilled social interactions require knowledge about others' intentions and the 
ability to implement this knowledge in real-time to generate appropriate 
responses to one's partner. Young infants demonstrate an understanding of other 
people's intentions (e.g. Woodward, Sommerville, Gerson, Henderson & Buresh, 
2009), yet it is not until the second year that infants seem to master the 
real-time implementation of their knowledge during social interactions (e.g. 
Warneken & Tomasello, 2007). The current study investigates the possibility that 
developments in social competence during the second year are related to 
increases in the speed with which infants can employ their understanding of 
others' intentions. Twenty- to 22-month-old infants (N = 23) viewed videos of 
goal-directed actions on a Tobii eye-tracker and then engaged in an interactive 
perspective-taking task. Infants who quickly and accurately anticipated another 
person's future behavior in the eye-tracking task were more successful at taking 
their partner's perspective in the social interaction. Success on the 
perspective-taking task was specifically related to the ability to correctly 
predict another person's intentions. These findings highlight the importance of 
not only being a 'smart' social partner but also a 'fast' social thinker.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12249
PMCID: PMC4522199
PMID: 25659980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1493. Dev Sci. 2015 Nov;18(6):1025-35. doi: 10.1111/desc.12276. Epub 2014 Dec 28.

Becoming a high-fidelity - super - imitator: what are the contributions of 
social and individual learning?

Subiaul F(1)(2)(3)(4), Patterson EM(5), Schilder B(2), Renner E(2), Barr R(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Speech & Hearing Science, The George Washington University, 
USA.
(2)Department of Anthropology: Center for the Advanced Study of Hominid 
Paleobiology, The George Washington University, USA.
(3)GW Institute for Neuroscience and Mind-Brain Institute, USA.
(4)Smithsonian Institution, National Museum of Natural History, USA.
(5)Department of Biology, Georgetown University, USA.
(6)Department of Psychology, Georgetown University, USA.

In contrast to other primates, human children's imitation performance goes from 
low to high fidelity soon after infancy. Are such changes associated with the 
development of other forms of learning? We addressed this question by testing 
215 children (26-59 months) on two social conditions (imitation, emulation) - 
involving a demonstration - and two asocial conditions (trial-and-error, recall) 
- involving individual learning - using two touchscreen tasks. The tasks 
required responding to either three different pictures in a specific picture 
order (Cognitive: Airplane→Ball→Cow) or three identical pictures in a specific 
spatial order (Motor-Spatial: Up→Down→Right). There were age-related 
improvements across all conditions and imitation, emulation and recall 
performance were significantly better than trial-and-error learning. Generalized 
linear models demonstrated that motor-spatial imitation fidelity was associated 
with age and motor-spatial emulation performance, but cognitive imitation 
fidelity was only associated with age. While this study provides evidence for 
multiple imitation mechanisms, the development of one of those mechanisms - 
motor-spatial imitation - may be bootstrapped by the development of another 
social learning skill - motor-spatial emulation. Together, these findings 
provide important clues about the development of imitation, which is arguably a 
distinctive feature of the human species.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12276
PMID: 25545051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1494. Dev Sci. 2015 Nov;18(6):940-56. doi: 10.1111/desc.12280. Epub 2014 Dec 20.

Drift in children's categories: when experienced distributions conflict with 
prior learning.

Kalish CW(1), Zhu X(2), Rogers TT(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Educational Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA.
(2)Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA.

Psychological intuitions about natural category structure do not always 
correspond to the true structure of the world. The current study explores young 
children's responses to conflict between intuitive structure and authoritative 
feedback using a semi-supervised learning (Zhu et al., 2007) paradigm. In three 
experiments, 160 children between the ages of 4 and 8 learned a one-dimensional 
decision criterion for distinguishing yummy and yucky 'alien fruits'. They then 
categorized a large number of new fruits without corrective feedback. The 
distribution of the new fruits was manipulated such that the natural boundary in 
the stimuli did not always correspond to the learned boundary. Children changed 
their decision criteria to reflect the structure of the new stimuli, effectively 
unlearning the original boundary. Younger children were especially swayed by the 
distributional information, being relatively insensitive to feedback that the 
original non-natural boundary was, in fact, still correct. Results are discussed 
in terms of children's ability to selectively attend to specific information 
(i.e. feedback vs. distribution), and their interests in forming generally 
useful representations of experience.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12280
PMID: 25530185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1495. Dev Sci. 2015 Nov;18(6):957-71. doi: 10.1111/desc.12271. Epub 2014 Dec 7.

Introspection on uncertainty and judicious help-seeking during the preschool 
years.

Coughlin C(1), Hembacher E(1), Lyons KE(2), Ghetti S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Center for Mind and Brain, University of 
California, Davis, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Metropolitan State University of Denver, USA.

Little is known about the mechanisms underlying a ubiquitous behavior in 
preschoolers, help-seeking. We tested the hypothesis that preschoolers' 
awareness of their own uncertainty is associated with help-seeking. Three-, 4-, 
and 5-year-olds (N = 125) completed a perceptual identification task twice: once 
independently and once when they could request help from a confederate whose 
competence level was manipulated. Consistent with our hypothesis, participants 
sought help more frequently on trials for which, when required to answer 
independently, they expressed lower confidence. Children in the bad-helper 
condition were slower to respond after receiving help than those in the 
good-helper condition. Finally, females and children with more advanced theory 
of mind were more likely to seek help, identifying additional factors that 
relate to help-seeking.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12271
PMID: 25483236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1496. Dev Sci. 2015 Jul;18(4):569-86. doi: 10.1111/desc.12240. Epub 2014 Nov 28.

Switching from reaching to navigation: differential cognitive strategies for 
spatial memory in children and adults.

Belmonti V(1)(2), Cioni G(1)(2), Berthoz A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Neuroscience, IRCCS Fondazione Stella Maris, Pisa 
(Calambrone), Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Italy.
(3)Laboratoire de Physiologie de la Perception et de l'Action, UMR7152 
CNRS-Collège de France, Paris, France.

Navigational and reaching spaces are known to involve different cognitive 
strategies and brain networks, whose development in humans is still debated. In 
fact, high-level spatial processing, including allocentric location encoding, is 
already available to very young children, but navigational strategies are not 
mature until late childhood. The Magic Carpet (MC) is a new electronic device 
translating the traditional Corsi Block-tapping Test (CBT) to navigational 
space. In this study, the MC and the CBT were used to assess spatial memory for 
navigation and for reaching, respectively. Our hypothesis was that school-age 
children would not treat MC stimuli as navigational paths, assimilating them to 
reaching sequences. Ninety-one healthy children aged 6 to 11 years and 18 adults 
were enrolled. Overall short-term memory performance (span) on both tests, 
effects of sequence geometry, and error patterns according to a new 
classification were studied. Span increased with age on both tests, but 
relatively more in navigational than in reaching space, particularly in males. 
Sequence geometry specifically influenced navigation, not reaching. The number 
of body rotations along the path affected MC performance in children more than 
in adults, and in women more than in men. Error patterns indicated that 
navigational sequences were increasingly retained as global paths across 
development, in contrast to separately stored reaching locations. A sequence of 
spatial locations can be coded as a navigational path only if a cognitive switch 
from a reaching mode to a navigation mode occurs. This implies the integration 
of egocentric and allocentric reference frames, of visual and idiothetic cues, 
and access to long-term memory. This switch is not yet fulfilled at school age 
due to immature executive functions.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12240
PMID: 25443319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1497. Dev Sci. 2015 Nov;18(6):994-1005. doi: 10.1111/desc.12262. Epub 2014 Nov 29.

The neural correlates of emotion processing in juvenile offenders.

Pincham HL(1), Bryce D(2), Pasco Fearon RM(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Developmental Neuroscience Unit, The Anna Freud Centre, UK.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Tübingen, Germany.
(3)Research Department of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology, 
University College London, UK.

Individuals with severe antisocial behaviour often demonstrate abnormalities or 
difficulties in emotion processing. Antisocial behaviour typically onsets before 
adulthood and is reflected in antisocial individuals at the biological level. We 
therefore conducted a brain-based study of emotion processing in juvenile 
offenders. Male adolescent offenders and age-matched non-offenders passively 
viewed emotional images whilst their brain activity was recorded using 
electroencephalography. The early posterior negativity (EPN) and the late 
positive potential (LPP) components were used as indices of emotion processing. 
For both juvenile offenders and non-offenders, the EPN differentiated unpleasant 
images from other image types, suggesting that early perceptual processing was 
not impaired in the offender group. In line with normal emotion processing, the 
LPP was significantly enhanced following unpleasant images for non-offenders. 
However, for juvenile offenders, the LPP did not differ across image categories, 
indicative of deficient emotional processing. The findings indicated that this 
brain-based hypo-reactivity occurred during a late stage of cognitive processing 
and was not a consequence of atypical early visual attention or perception. This 
study is the first to show attenuated emotion processing in juvenile offenders 
at the neural level. Overall, these results have the potential to inform 
interventions for juvenile offending.

© 2014 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12262
PMID: 25440113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1498. Dev Sci. 2015 Jul;18(4):655-63. doi: 10.1111/desc.12241. Epub 2014 Oct 5.

Individuation training with other-race faces reduces preschoolers' implicit 
racial bias: a link between perceptual and social representation of faces in 
children.

Xiao WS(1)(2), Fu G(1), Quinn PC(3), Qin J(1), Tanaka JW(4), Pascalis O(5), Lee 
K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Preschool Teacher Education, Zhejiang Normal University, China.
(2)Dr Eric Jackman Institute of Child Study, University of Toronto, Canada.
(3)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Delaware, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Victoria, Canada.
(5)Laboratoire de Psychologie et NeuroCognition, Université de Grenoble Alpes, 
France.

The present study examined whether perceptual individuation training with 
other-race faces could reduce preschool children's implicit racial bias. We used 
an 'angry = outgroup' paradigm to measure Chinese children's implicit racial 
bias against African individuals before and after training. In Experiment 1, 
children between 4 and 6 years were presented with angry or happy racially 
ambiguous faces that were morphed between Chinese and African faces. Initially, 
Chinese children demonstrated implicit racial bias: they categorized happy 
racially ambiguous faces as own-race (Chinese) and angry racially ambiguous 
faces as other-race (African). Then, the children participated in a training 
session where they learned to individuate African faces. Children's implicit 
racial bias was significantly reduced after training relative to that before 
training. Experiment 2 used the same procedure as Experiment 1, except that 
Chinese children were trained with own-race Chinese faces. These children did 
not display a significant reduction in implicit racial bias. Our results 
demonstrate that early implicit racial bias can be reduced by presenting 
children with other-race face individuation training, and support a linkage 
between perceptual and social representations of face information in children.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12241
PMID: 25284211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1499. Dev Sci. 2015 May;18(3):502-9. doi: 10.1111/desc.12234. Epub 2014 Sep 16.

Whose idea is it anyway? The importance of reputation in acknowledgement.

Shaw A(1), Olson K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, USA.

Six-year-old children negatively evaluate plagiarizers just as adults do (Olson 
& Shaw, 2011), but why do they dislike plagiarizers? Children may think 
plagiarism is wrong because plagiarizing negatively impacts other people's 
reputations. We investigated this possibility by having 6- to 9-year-old 
children evaluate people who shared their own or other people's ideas (stories). 
In Experiment 1, we found that children consider it acceptable to retell someone 
else's story if the source is given credit for their story (improving the 
source's reputation), but not if the reteller claims credit for the story 
(steals credit away from someone else). Experiments 2 and 3 showed that children 
do not consider it bad to lie by giving someone else credit for one's own good 
story (improving someone else's reputation), but do consider it bad to give 
someone else credit for one's own bad story (improving one's own reputation at 
the expense of someone else's). Experiment 4 demonstrated that children think it 
is equally bad to take credit for someone else's idea for oneself as it is to 
take someone else's idea and give credit to someone else, suggesting that 
children dislike when others take credit away from someone else, regardless of 
whether or not it improves the plagiarizer's reputation. Our results suggest 
that children dislike plagiarism because it negatively affects others' 
reputations by taking credit away from them.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12234
PMID: 25227735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1500. Dev Sci. 2015 Jul;18(4):635-44. doi: 10.1111/desc.12230. Epub 2014 Sep 7.

Musical rhythm discrimination explains individual differences in grammar skills 
in children.

Gordon RL(1), Shivers CM(1), Wieland EA(2), Kotz SA(3)(4), Yoder PJ(1), Devin 
McAuley J(5).

Author information:
(1)Vanderbilt Kennedy Center, Vanderbilt University, USA.
(2)Department of Communicative Sciences and Disorders, Michigan State 
University, USA.
(3)Department of Neuropsychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and 
Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany.
(4)School of Psychological Sciences, The University of Manchester, UK.
(5)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience Program, Michigan State University, 
USA.

This study considered a relation between rhythm perception skills and individual 
differences in phonological awareness and grammar abilities, which are two 
language skills crucial for academic achievement. Twenty-five typically 
developing 6-year-old children were given standardized assessments of rhythm 
perception, phonological awareness, morpho-syntactic competence, and non-verbal 
cognitive ability. Rhythm perception accounted for 48% of the variance in 
morpho-syntactic competence after controlling for non-verbal IQ, socioeconomic 
status, and prior musical activities. Children with higher phonological 
awareness scores were better able to discriminate complex rhythms than children 
with lower scores, but not after controlling for IQ. This study is the first to 
show a relation between rhythm perception skills and morpho-syntactic production 
in children with typical language development. These findings extend the 
literature showing substantial overlap of neurocognitive resources for 
processing music and language. A video abstract of this article can be viewed 
at: http://youtu.be/_lO692qHDNg.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12230
PMID: 25195623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1501. Dev Sci. 2015 May;18(3):351-72. doi: 10.1111/desc.12216. Epub 2014 Aug 6.

Brain hyper-connectivity and operation-specific deficits during arithmetic 
problem solving in children with developmental dyscalculia.

Rosenberg-Lee M(1), Ashkenazi S, Chen T, Young CB, Geary DC, Menon V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, USA.

Developmental dyscalculia (DD) is marked by specific deficits in processing 
numerical and mathematical information despite normal intelligence (IQ) and 
reading ability. We examined how brain circuits used by young children with DD 
to solve simple addition and subtraction problems differ from those used by 
typically developing (TD) children who were matched on age, IQ, reading ability, 
and working memory. Children with DD were slower and less accurate during 
problem solving than TD children, and were especially impaired on their ability 
to solve subtraction problems. Children with DD showed significantly greater 
activity in multiple parietal, occipito-temporal and prefrontal cortex regions 
while solving addition and subtraction problems. Despite poorer performance 
during subtraction, children with DD showed greater activity in multiple 
intra-parietal sulcus (IPS) and superior parietal lobule subdivisions in the 
dorsal posterior parietal cortex as well as fusiform gyrus in the ventral 
occipito-temporal cortex. Critically, effective connectivity analyses revealed 
hyper-connectivity, rather than reduced connectivity, between the IPS and 
multiple brain systems including the lateral fronto-parietal and default mode 
networks in children with DD during both addition and subtraction. These 
findings suggest the IPS and its functional circuits are a major locus of 
dysfunction during both addition and subtraction problem solving in DD, and that 
inappropriate task modulation and hyper-connectivity, rather than 
under-engagement and under-connectivity, are the neural mechanisms underlying 
problem solving difficulties in children with DD. We discuss our findings in the 
broader context of multiple levels of analysis and performance issues inherent 
in neuroimaging studies of typical and atypical development.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12216
PMCID: PMC4320038
PMID: 25098903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1502. Dev Sci. 2015 May;18(3):495-501. doi: 10.1111/desc.12224. Epub 2014 Jul 25.

Children use salience to solve coordination problems.

Grueneisen S(1), Wyman E, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Department of 
Developmental and Comparative Psychology, Leipzig, Germany.

Humans are routinely required to coordinate with others. When communication is 
not possible, adults often achieve this by using salient cues in the environment 
(e.g. going to the Eiffel Tower, as an obvious meeting point). To explore the 
development of this capacity, we presented dyads of 3-, 5-, and 8-year-olds (N = 
144) with a coordination problem: Two balls had to be inserted into the same of 
four boxes to obtain a reward. Identical pictures were attached to three boxes 
whereas a unique--and thus salient--picture was attached to the fourth. Children 
either received one ball each, and so had to choose the same box (experimental 
condition), or they received both balls and could get the reward independently 
(control condition). In all cases, children could neither communicate nor see 
each other's choices. Children were significantly more likely to choose the 
salient option in the experimental condition than in the control condition. 
However, only the two older age groups chose the salient box above chance 
levels. This study is the first to show that children from at least age 5 can 
solve coordination problems by converging on a salient solution.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12224
PMID: 25066201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1503. Dev Sci. 2015 Mar;18(2):327-34. doi: 10.1111/desc.12218. Epub 2014 Jul 22.

Perceived trustworthiness of faces drives trust behaviour in children.

Ewing L(1), Caulfield F, Read A, Rhodes G.

Author information:
(1)ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders, School of 
Psychology, University of Western Australia, Australia; Department of 
Psychological Science, Birkbeck, University of London, UK.

Facial appearances can powerfully influence adults' trust behaviour, despite 
limited evidence that these cues constitute honest signals of trustworthiness. 
It is not clear, however, whether the same is also true for children. The 
current study investigated whether, like adults, 5-year-olds and 10-year-olds 
are more likely to place their trust in partners that look trustworthy than 
those that look untrustworthy. A second, closely related question was whether 
children also explicitly value the information from face cues when making trust 
decisions. We investigated these questions using Token Quest: an economic trust 
game that gave participants the opportunity to make investments with a series of 
partners who might (or might not) repay their trust with large returns. These 
interactions occurred under different conditions, including one in which 
participants were shown the face of each partner and another in which they could 
'purchase' access to faces with a portion of their investment capital. Results 
indicated that, like adults, 10-year-old children selectively placed their trust 
in those partners they perceived as looking trustworthy and many were willing to 
'pay' to purchase access to these face cues during the trust game. We observed a 
similar profile of trust behaviour in 5-year-olds, with no significant group 
difference in the impact of face cues on behaviour across the three age groups. 
Together, these findings indicate that the influence of face cues on trust 
behaviour emerges early, and highlight a capacity for sophisticated social 
cognition in young children.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12218
PMID: 25051999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1504. Dev Sci. 2015 Mar;18(2):243-53. doi: 10.1111/desc.12209. Epub 2014 Jul 11.

Tuning the developing brain to emotional body expressions.

Missana M(1), Atkinson AP, Grossmann T.

Author information:
(1)Early Social Development Group, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and 
Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany.

Reading others' emotional body expressions is an essential social skill. Adults 
readily recognize emotions from body movements. However, it is unclear when in 
development infants become sensitive to bodily expressed emotions. We examined 
event-related brain potentials (ERPs) in 4- and 8-month-old infants in response 
to point-light displays (PLDs) of happy and fearful body expressions presented 
in two orientations (upright and inverted). The ERP results revealed that 
8-month-olds but not 4-month-olds respond sensitively to the orientation and the 
emotion of the dynamic expressions. Specifically, 8-month-olds showed (i) an 
early (200-400 ms) orientation-sensitive positivity over frontal and central 
electrodes, and (ii) a late (700-1100 ms) emotion-sensitive positivity over 
temporal and parietal electrodes in the right hemisphere. These findings suggest 
that orientation-sensitive and emotion-sensitive brain processes, distinct in 
timing and topography, develop between 4 and 8 months of age.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12209
PMID: 25041388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1505. Dev Sci. 2015 Jan;18(1):175-82. doi: 10.1111/desc.12208. Epub 2014 Jul 16.

Causal learning from probabilistic events in 24-month-olds: an action measure.

Waismeyer A(1), Meltzoff AN, Gopnik A.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Learning & Brain Sciences, University of Washington, USA.

How do young children learn about causal structure in an uncertain and variable 
world? We tested whether they can use observed probabilistic information to 
solve causal learning problems. In two experiments, 24-month-olds observed an 
adult produce a probabilistic pattern of causal evidence. The toddlers then were 
given an opportunity to design their own intervention. In Experiment 1, toddlers 
saw one object bring about an effect with a higher probability than a second 
object. In Experiment 2, the frequency of the effect was held constant, though 
its probability differed. After observing the probabilistic evidence, toddlers 
in both experiments chose to act on the object that was more likely to produce 
the effect. The results demonstrate that toddlers can learn about cause and 
effect without trial-and-error or linguistic instruction on the task, simply by 
observing the probabilistic patterns of evidence resulting from the imperfect 
actions of other social agents. Such observational causal learning from 
probabilistic displays supports human children's rapid cultural learning.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12208
PMID: 25041264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1506. Dev Sci. 2015 Mar;18(2):219-31. doi: 10.1111/desc.12203. Epub 2014 Jul 18.

Fearful faces drive gaze-cueing and threat bias effects in children on the 
lookout for danger.

Dawel A(1), Palermo R, O'Kearney R, Irons J, McKone E.

Author information:
(1)Research School of Psychology, The Australian National University, Australia; 
ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders, Australia.

Most developmental studies of face emotion processing show faces in isolation, 
in the absence of any broader context. Here we investigate two types of 
interactions between expression and threat contexts. First, in adults, following 
of another person's direction of social attention is increased when that person 
shows fear and the context requires vigilance for danger. We investigate whether 
this also occurs in children. Using a Posner-style eye-gaze cueing paradigm, we 
tested whether children would show greater gaze-cueing from fearful than happy 
expressions when the task was to be vigilant for possible dangerous animals. 
Testing across the 8-12-year-old age range, we found this fear priority effect 
was absent in the youngest children but developed to reach adult levels in the 
oldest children. However, even the oldest children were unable to sustain 
fear-prioritization when the onset of the target was delayed. Second, we 
addressed the development of 'threat bias' - namely faster identification of 
dangerous animals than safe animals - in the social context provided by 
expressive faces. In our non-anxious samples (i.e. with typical-population 
levels of anxiety), adults showed a threat bias regardless of the expression or 
looking direction of the just-seen cue face whereas 8-12-year-olds only showed a 
threat bias when the just-seen cue face displayed fear. Overall, the results 
argue that some, but not all, aspects of expression-context interactions are 
mature by 12 years of age.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12203
PMID: 25040889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1507. Dev Sci. 2015 Mar;18(2):298-313. doi: 10.1111/desc.12217. Epub 2014 Jul 17.

Effects of early institutionalization on the development of emotion processing: 
a case for relative sparing?

Moulson MC(1), Shutts K, Fox NA, Zeanah CH, Spelke ES, Nelson CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Ryerson University, Canada.

We tested the capacity to perceive visual expressions of emotion, and to use 
those expressions as guides to social decisions, in three groups of 8- to 
10-year-old Romanian children: children abandoned to institutions then randomly 
assigned to remain in 'care as usual' (institutional care); children abandoned 
to institutions then randomly assigned to a foster care intervention; and 
community children who had never been institutionalized. Experiment 1 examined 
children's recognition of happy, sad, fearful, and angry facial expressions that 
varied in intensity. Children assigned to institutional care had higher 
thresholds for identifying happy expressions than foster care or community 
children, but did not differ in their thresholds for identifying the other 
facial expressions. Moreover, the error rates of the three groups of children 
were the same for all of the facial expressions. Experiment 2 examined 
children's ability to use facial expressions of emotion to guide social 
decisions about whom to befriend and whom to help. Children assigned to 
institutional care were less accurate than foster care or community children at 
deciding whom to befriend; however, the groups did not differ in their ability 
to decide whom to help. Overall, although there were group differences in some 
abilities, all three groups of children performed well across tasks. The results 
are discussed in the context of theoretical accounts of the development of 
emotion processing.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12217
PMCID: PMC4297604
PMID: 25039290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1508. Dev Sci. 2015 Jan;18(1):90-105. doi: 10.1111/desc.12188. Epub 2014 May 13.

Electrophysiological evidence of heterogeneity in visual statistical learning in 
young children with ASD.

Jeste SS(1), Kirkham N, Senturk D, Hasenstab K, Sugar C, Kupelian C, Baker E, 
Sanders AJ, Shimizu C, Norona A, Paparella T, Freeman SF, Johnson SP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, UCLA Semel Institute of Biobehavioral Sciences, 
USA.

Statistical learning is characterized by detection of regularities in one's 
environment without an awareness or intention to learn, and it may play a 
critical role in language and social behavior. Accordingly, in this study we 
investigated the electrophysiological correlates of visual statistical learning 
in young children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) using an event-related 
potential shape learning paradigm, and we examined the relation between visual 
statistical learning and cognitive function. Compared to typically developing 
(TD) controls, the ASD group as a whole showed reduced evidence of learning as 
defined by N1 (early visual discrimination) and P300 (attention to novelty) 
components. Upon further analysis, in the ASD group there was a positive 
correlation between N1 amplitude difference and non-verbal IQ, and a positive 
correlation between P300 amplitude difference and adaptive social function. 
Children with ASD and a high non-verbal IQ and high adaptive social function 
demonstrated a distinctive pattern of learning. This is the first study to 
identify electrophysiological markers of visual statistical learning in children 
with ASD. Through this work we have demonstrated heterogeneity in statistical 
learning in ASD that maps onto non-verbal cognition and adaptive social 
function.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12188
PMCID: PMC4231013
PMID: 24824992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1509. Dev Sci. 2014 Sep;17(5):667-81. doi: 10.1111/desc.12158. Epub 2014 Apr 22.

Cognitive control moderates early childhood temperament in predicting social 
behavior in 7-year-old children: an ERP study.

Lamm C(1), Walker OL, Degnan KA, Henderson HA, Pine DS, McDermott JM, Fox NA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of New Orleans, USA.

Behavioral inhibition (BI) is a temperament associated with heightened vigilance 
and fear of novelty in early childhood, and social reticence and increased risk 
for anxiety problems later in development. However, not all behaviorally 
inhibited children develop signs of anxiety. One mechanism that might contribute 
to the variability in developmental trajectories is the recruitment of 
cognitive-control resources. The current study measured N2 activation, an ERP 
(event-related potential) associated with cognitive control, and modeled 
source-space activation (LORETA; Low Resolution Brain Electromagnetic 
Tomography) at 7 years of age while children performed a go/no-go task. 
Activation was estimated for the entire cortex and then exported for four 
regions of interest: ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC), ventrolateral 
prefrontal cortex (VLPFC), dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dorsal ACC), and 
dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). BI was measured in early childhood 
(ages 2 and 3 years). Anxiety problems and social reticence were measured at 7 
years of age to ascertain stability of temperamental style. Results revealed 
that BI was associated with increased performance accuracy, longer reaction 
times, greater (more negative) N2 activation, and higher estimated dorsal ACC 
and DLPFC activation. Furthermore, early BI was only associated with social 
reticence at age 7 at higher (more negative) levels of N2 activation or higher 
estimated dorsal ACC or DLPFC activation. Results are discussed in the context 
of overcontrolled behavior contributing to social reticence and signs of anxiety 
in middle childhood.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12158
PMCID: PMC4334573
PMID: 24754610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1510. Dev Sci. 2014 May;17(3):321-37. doi: 10.1111/desc.12083. Epub 2014 Feb 7.

Rich analysis and rational models: inferring individual behavior from infant 
looking data.

Piantadosi ST(1), Kidd C, Aslin R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester, USA.

Studies of infant looking times over the past 50 years have provided profound 
insights about cognitive development, but their dependent measures and analytic 
techniques are quite limited. In the context of infants' attention to discrete 
sequential events, we show how a Bayesian data analysis approach can be combined 
with a rational cognitive model to create a rich data analysis framework for 
infant looking times. We formalize (i) a statistical learning model, (ii) a 
parametric linking between the learning model's beliefs and infants' looking 
behavior, and (iii) a data analysis approach and model that infers parameters of 
the cognitive model and linking function for groups and individuals. Using this 
approach, we show that recent findings from Kidd, Piantadosi and Aslin (iv) of a 
U-shaped relationship between look-away probability and stimulus complexity even 
holds within infants and is not due to averaging subjects with different types 
of behavior. Our results indicate that individual infants prefer stimuli of 
intermediate complexity, reserving attention for events that are moderately 
predictable given their probabilistic expectations about the world.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12083
PMCID: PMC3996510
PMID: 24750256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1511. Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):991-1002. doi: 10.1111/desc.12181. Epub 2014 Apr 7.

Social class differences produce social group preferences.

Horwitz SR(1), Shutts K, Olson KR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, USA.

Some social groups are higher in socioeconomic status than others and the former 
tend to be favored over the latter. The present research investigated whether 
observing group differences in wealth alone can directly cause children to 
prefer wealthier groups. In Experiment 1, 4-5-year-old children developed a 
preference for a wealthy novel group over a less wealthy group. In Experiment 2, 
children did not develop preferences when groups differed by another kind of 
positive/negative attribute (i.e. living in brightly colored houses vs. drab 
houses), suggesting that wealth is a particularly meaningful group distinction. 
Lastly, in Experiment 3, the effect of favoring novel wealthy groups was 
moderated by group membership: Children assigned to a wealthy group showed 
ingroup favoritism, but those assigned to a less wealthy group did not. These 
experiments shed light on why children tend to be biased in favor of social 
groups that are higher in socioeconomic status.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12181
PMCID: PMC4188807
PMID: 24702971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1512. Dev Sci. 2014 Sep;17(5):647-59. doi: 10.1111/desc.12148. Epub 2014 Mar 25.

False belief in infancy: a fresh look.

Heyes C(1).

Author information:
(1)All Souls College & Department of Experimental Psychology, University of 
Oxford, UK.

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2014 Sep;17(5):660-4.
    Dev Sci. 2014 Sep;17(5):665-6.

Can infants appreciate that others have false beliefs? Do they have a theory of 
mind? In this article I provide a detailed review of more than 20 experiments 
that have addressed these questions, and offered an affirmative answer, using 
nonverbal 'violation of expectation' and 'anticipatory looking' procedures. 
Although many of these experiments are both elegant and ingenious, I argue that 
their results can be explained by the operation of domain-general processes and 
in terms of 'low-level novelty'. This hypothesis suggests that the infants' 
looking behaviour is a function of the degree to which the observed (perceptual 
novelty) and remembered or expected (imaginal novelty) low-level properties of 
the test stimuli - their colours, shapes and movements - are novel with respect 
to events encoded by the infants earlier in the experiment. If the low-level 
novelty hypothesis is correct, research on false belief in infancy currently 
falls short of demonstrating that infants have even an implicit theory of mind. 
However, I suggest that the use of two experimental strategies - inanimate 
control procedures, and self-informed belief induction - could be used in 
combination with existing methods to bring us much closer to understanding the 
evolutionary and developmental origins of theory of mind.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12148
PMID: 24666559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1513. Dev Sci. 2014 Nov;17(6):905-19. doi: 10.1111/desc.12154. Epub 2014 Mar 1.

Understanding the mapping between numerical approximation and number words: 
evidence from Williams syndrome and typical development.

Libertus ME(1), Feigenson L, Halberda J, Landau B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, 
USA; Department of Psychology, Learning Research and Development Center, 
University of Pittsburgh, USA.

All numerate humans have access to two systems of number representation: an 
exact system that is argued to be based on language and that supports formal 
mathematics, and an Approximate Number System (ANS) that is present at birth and 
appears independent of language. Here we examine the interaction between these 
two systems by comparing the profiles of people with Williams syndrome (WS) with 
those of typically developing children between ages 4 and 9 years. WS is a rare 
genetic deficit marked by fluent and well-structured language together with 
severe spatial deficits, deficits in formal math, and abnormalities of the 
parietal cortex, which is thought to subserve the ANS. One of our tasks, 
requiring approximate number comparison but no number words, revealed that the 
ANS precision of adolescents with WS was in the range of typically developing 2- 
to 4-year-olds. Their precision improved with age but never reached the level of 
typically developing 6- or 9-year-olds. The second task, requiring verbal number 
estimation using number words, revealed that the estimates produced by 
adolescents with WS were comparable to those of typically developing 6- and 
9-year-olds, i.e. were more advanced than their ANS precision. These results 
suggest that ANS precision is somewhat separable from the mapping between 
approximate numerosities and number words, as the former can be severely damaged 
in a genetic disorder without commensurate impairment in the latter.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12154
PMCID: PMC4150860
PMID: 24581047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1514. Dev Sci. 2014 Sep;17(5):714-26. doi: 10.1111/desc.12152. Epub 2014 Feb 28.

Numerical predictors of arithmetic success in grades 1-6.

Lyons IM(1), Price GR, Vaessen A, Blomert L, Ansari D.

Author information:
(1)Numerical Cognition Laboratory, Department of Psychology & Brain and Mind 
Institute, The University of Western Ontario, Canada.

Math relies on mastery and integration of a wide range of simpler numerical 
processes and concepts. Recent work has identified several numerical 
competencies that predict variation in math ability. We examined the unique 
relations between eight basic numerical skills and early arithmetic ability in a 
large sample (N = 1391) of children across grades 1-6. In grades 1-2, children's 
ability to judge the relative magnitude of numerical symbols was most predictive 
of early arithmetic skills. The unique contribution of children's ability to 
assess ordinality in numerical symbols steadily increased across grades, 
overtaking all other predictors by grade 6. We found no evidence that children's 
ability to judge the relative magnitude of approximate, nonsymbolic numbers was 
uniquely predictive of arithmetic ability at any grade. Overall, symbolic number 
processing was more predictive of arithmetic ability than nonsymbolic number 
processing, though the relative importance of symbolic number ability appears to 
shift from cardinal to ordinal processing.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12152
PMID: 24581004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1515. Dev Sci. 2014 Jul;17(4):564-83. doi: 10.1111/desc.12142. Epub 2014 Feb 27.

Effects of classroom bilingualism on task-shifting, verbal memory, and word 
learning in children.

Kaushanskaya M(1), Gross M, Buac M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, USA.

We examined the effects of classroom bilingual experience in children on an 
array of cognitive skills. Monolingual English-speaking children were compared 
with children who spoke English as the native language and who had been exposed 
to Spanish in the context of dual-immersion schooling for an average of 2 years. 
The groups were compared on a measure of non-linguistic task-shifting; measures 
of verbal short-term and working memory; and measures of word learning. The two 
groups of children did not differ on measures of non-linguistic task-shifting 
and verbal short-term memory. However, the classroom-exposure bilingual group 
outperformed the monolingual group on the measure of verbal working memory and a 
measure of word learning. Together, these findings indicate that while exposure 
to a second language in a classroom setting may not be sufficient to engender 
changes in cognitive control, it can facilitate verbal memory and verbal 
learning.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12142
PMCID: PMC4224028
PMID: 24576079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1516. Dev Sci. 2014 Jul;17(4):492-505. doi: 10.1111/desc.12143. Epub 2014 Feb 5.

Acuity of the approximate number system and preschoolers' quantitative 
development.

van Marle K(1), Chu FW, Li Y, Geary DC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Missouri, USA.

The study assessed the relations among acuity of the inherent approximate number 
system (ANS), performance on measures of symbolic quantitative knowledge, and 
mathematics achievement for a sample of 138 (64 boys) preschoolers. The Weber 
fraction (a measure of ANS acuity) and associated task accuracy were 
significantly correlated with mathematics achievement following one year of 
preschool, and predicted performance on measures of children's explicit 
knowledge of Arabic numerals, number words, and cardinal value, controlling for 
age, sex, parental education, intelligence, executive control, and preliteracy 
knowledge. The relation between ANS acuity, as measured by the Weber fraction 
and task accuracy, and mathematics achievement was fully mediated by children's 
performance on the symbolic quantitative tasks, with knowledge of cardinal value 
emerging as a particularly important mediator. The overall pattern suggests that 
ANS acuity facilitates the early learning of symbolic quantitative knowledge and 
indirectly influences mathematics achievement through this knowledge.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12143
PMID: 24498980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1517. Dev Sci. 2014 May;17(3):352-65. doi: 10.1111/desc.12125. Epub 2014 Jan 11.

Sequence-specific procedural learning deficits in children with specific 
language impairment.

Hsu HJ(1), Bishop DV.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Audiology and Speech Therapy, National Kaohsiung Normal 
University, Taiwan.

This study tested the procedural deficit hypothesis of specific language 
impairment (SLI) by comparing children's performance in two motor procedural 
learning tasks and an implicit verbal sequence learning task. Participants were 
7- to 11-year-old children with SLI (n = 48), typically developing age-matched 
children (n = 20) and younger typically developing children matched for 
receptive grammar (n = 28). In a serial reaction time task, the children with 
SLI performed at the same level as the grammar-matched children, but poorer than 
age-matched controls in learning motor sequences. When tested with a motor 
procedural learning task that did not involve learning sequential relationships 
between discrete elements (i.e. pursuit rotor), the children with SLI performed 
comparably with age-matched children and better than younger grammar-matched 
controls. In addition, poor implicit learning of word sequences in a verbal 
memory task (the Hebb effect) was found in the children with SLI. Together, 
these findings suggest that SLI might be characterized by deficits in learning 
sequence-specific information, rather than generally weak procedural learning.

© 2014 The Authors. Developmental Science Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12125
PMCID: PMC4031743
PMID: 24410990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1518. Dev Sci. 2014 Mar;17(2):224-38. doi: 10.1111/desc.12073. Epub 2014 Jan 11.

What's mom got to do with it? Contributions of maternal executive function and 
caregiving to the development of executive function across early childhood.

Cuevas K(1), Deater-Deckard K, Kim-Spoon J, Watson AJ, Morasch KC, Bell MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut, USA.

Executive functions (EFs; e.g. working memory, inhibitory control) are mediated 
by the prefrontal cortex and associated with optimal cognitive and 
socio-emotional development. This study provides the first concurrent analysis 
of the relative contributions of maternal EF and caregiving to child EF. A group 
of children and their mothers (n = 62) completed age-appropriate interaction 
(10, 24, 36 months) and EF tasks (child: 24, 36, and 48 months). Regression 
analyses revealed that by 36 months of age, maternal EF and negative caregiving 
behaviors accounted for unique variance in child EF, above and beyond maternal 
education and child verbal ability. These findings were confirmed when using an 
early child EF composite-our most reliable measure of EF - and a similar pattern 
was found when controlling for stability in child EF. Furthermore, there was 
evidence that maternal EF had significant indirect effects on changes in child 
EF through maternal caregiving. At 24 months, EF was associated with maternal 
EF, but not negative caregiving behaviors. Taken together, these findings 
suggest that links between negative caregiving and child EF are increasingly 
manifested during early childhood. Although maternal EF and negative caregiving 
are related, they provide unique information about the development of child EF. 
A video abstract of this article can be viewed at 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NPKXFbbrkps.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12073
PMCID: PMC3947460
PMID: 24410963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1519. Dev Sci. 2014 May;17(3):452-61. doi: 10.1111/desc.12136. Epub 2014 Jan 11.

Breastfeeding and trajectories of children's cognitive development.

Huang J(1), Peters KE, Vaughn MG, Witko C.

Author information:
(1)School of Social Work, College for Public Health and Social Justice, Saint 
Louis University, USA.

The aim of this study was to examine the association of breastfeeding practices 
with the growth trajectories of children's cognitive development. We used data 
from the Child Development Supplement (CDS) of the Panel Study of Income 
Dynamics (PSID) with variables on presence and duration of breastfeeding and 
standardized test scores obtained during three different panel waves (N = 2681). 
After adjusting for covariates we found that breastfed children had higher test 
scores but that breastfed and non-breastfed children had similar growth 
trajectories in test scores over time. The results indicate that breastfeeding 
has an important association with test scores, and that subsequent schooling and 
other experiences during adolescence do not eliminate the breastfeeding gap that 
appears in very early childhood.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12136
PMCID: PMC3997588
PMID: 24410811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1520. Dev Sci. 2014 Jan;17(1):125-41. doi: 10.1111/desc.12102. Epub 2013 Oct 12.

The deficit of letter processing in developmental dyslexia: combining evidence 
from dyslexics, typical readers and illiterate adults.

Fernandes T(1), Vale AP, Martins B, Morais J, Kolinsky R.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Psychology and Education Sciences, Universidade do Porto, 
Portugal.

To clarify the link between anomalous letter processing and developmental 
dyslexia, we examined the impact of surrounding contours on letter vs. 
pseudo-letter processing by three groups of children - phonological dyslexics 
and two controls, one matched for chronological age, the other for reading level 
- and three groups of adults differing by schooling and literacy - unschooled 
illiterates and ex-illiterates, and schooled literates. For pseudo-letters, all 
groups showed congruence effects (CE: better performance for targets surrounded 
by a congruent than by an incongruent shape). In contrast, for letters, only 
dyslexics exhibited a CE, strongly related to their phonological recoding 
abilities even after partialling out working memory, whereas the reverse held 
true for the pseudo-letter CE. In illiterate adults, the higher letter 
knowledge, the smaller their letter CE; their letter processing was immune (to 
some extent) to inference from surrounding information. The absence of a letter 
CE in illiterates and the positive CE in dyslexics have their origin in 
different aspects of the same ability, i.e. phonological recoding.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12102
PMID: 24341976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1521. Dev Sci. 2014 Jan;17(1):71-8. doi: 10.1111/desc.12099. Epub 2013 Nov 6.

Effects of anonymous peer observation on adolescents' preference for immediate 
rewards.

Weigard A(1), Chein J, Albert D, Smith A, Steinberg L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Temple University, USA.

Research suggests that the presence of peers influences adolescent risk-taking 
by increasing the perceived reward value of risky decisions. While prior work 
has involved observation of participants by their friends, the current study 
examined whether observation by an anonymous peer could elicit similarly 
increased reward sensitivity. Late adolescent participants completed a delay 
discounting task either alone or under the belief that performance was being 
observed from a neighboring room by an unknown viewer of the same gender and 
age. Even in this limited social context, participants demonstrated a 
significantly increased preference for smaller, immediate rewards when they 
believed that they were being watched. This outcome challenges several intuitive 
accounts of the peer effect on adolescent risk-taking, and indicates that the 
peer influence on reward sensitivity during late adolescence is not dependent on 
familiarity with the observer. The findings have both theoretical and practical 
implications for our understanding of social influences on adolescents' risky 
behavior.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12099
PMCID: PMC3869036
PMID: 24341973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1522. Dev Sci. 2014 Sep;17(5):757-65. doi: 10.1111/desc.12147. Epub 2013 Dec 1.

Highchair philosophers: the impact of seating context-dependent exploration on 
children's naming biases.

Perry LK(1), Samuelson LK, Burdinie JB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA; DeLTA Center, 
University of Iowa, USA.

We examine developmental interactions between context, exploration, and word 
learning. Infants show an understanding of how nonsolid substances are 
categorized that does not reliably transfer to learning how these categories are 
named in laboratory tasks. We argue that what infants learn about naming 
nonsolid substances is contextually bound - most nonsolids that toddlers are 
familiar with are foods and thus, typically experienced when sitting in a 
highchair. We asked whether 16-month-old children's naming of nonsolids would 
improve if they were tested in that typical context. Children tested in the 
highchair demonstrated better understanding of how nonsolids are named. 
Furthermore, context-based differences in exploration drove differences in the 
properties attended to in real-time. We discuss what implications this 
context-dependency has for understanding the development of an ontological 
distinction between solids and nonsolids. Together, these results demonstrate a 
developmental cascade between context, exploration, and word learning.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12147
PMCID: PMC4040339
PMID: 24289734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1523. Dev Sci. 2014 Mar;17(2):239-47. doi: 10.1111/desc.12110. Epub 2013 Nov 28.

Sensitivity to social and non-social threats in temperamentally shy children 
at-risk for anxiety.

LoBue V(1), Pérez-Edgar K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Rutgers University, USA.

In the current brief report, we examined threat perception in a group of young 
children who may be at-risk for anxiety due to extreme temperamental shyness. 
Results demonstrate specific differences in the processing of social threats: 4- 
to 7-year-olds in the high-shy group demonstrated a greater bias for social 
threats (angry faces) than did a comparison group of low-shy children. This 
pattern did not hold for non-social threats like snakes: Both groups showed an 
equal bias for the detection of snakes over frogs. The results suggest that 
children who are tempermentally shy have a heightened sensitivity to social 
signs of threat early in development. These findings have implications for 
understanding mechanisms of early threat sensitivity that may predict later 
socioemotional maladjustment.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12110
PMCID: PMC3947498
PMID: 24283271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1524. Dev Sci. 2014 Jan;17(1):11-22. doi: 10.1111/desc.12108. Epub 2013 Nov 23.

Dissociation between small and large numerosities in newborn infants.

Coubart A(1), Izard V, Spelke ES, Marie J, Streri A.

Author information:
(1)Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, France; CNRS UMR 8158, 
Laboratoire Psychologie de la Perception, Paris, France.

In the first year of life, infants possess two cognitive systems encoding 
numerical information: one for processing the numerosity of sets of 4 or more 
items, and the second for tracking up to 3 objects in parallel. While a previous 
study showed the former system to be already present a few hours after birth, it 
is unknown whether the latter system is functional at this age. Here, we adapt 
the auditory-visual matching paradigm that previously revealed sensitivity to 
large numerosities to test sensitivity to numerosities spanning the range from 2 
to 12. Across studies, newborns discriminated pairs of large numerosities in a 
3:1 ratio, even when the smaller numerosity was 3 (3 vs. 9). In contrast, 
newborn infants failed to discriminate pairs including the numerosity 2, even at 
the same ratio (2 vs. 6). These findings mirror the dissociation that has been 
reported with older infants, albeit with a discontinuity situated between 
numerosities 2 and 3. Two alternative explanations are compatible with our 
results: either newborn infants have a separate system for processing small 
sets, and the capacity of this system is limited to 2 objects; or newborn 
infants possess only one system to represent numerosities, and this system 
either is not functional or is extremely imprecise when it is applied to small 
numerosities.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12108
PMCID: PMC4624260
PMID: 24267592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1525. Dev Sci. 2013 Nov;16(6):980-90. doi: 10.1111/desc.12071. Epub 2013 Jun 11.

Word-form familiarity bootstraps infant speech segmentation.

Altvater-Mackensen N(1), Mani N.

Author information:
(1)Research Group Early Social Development, Max Planck Institute for Human 
Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany; Research Group Language 
Acquisition, Georg-August-Universität, Göttingen, Germany.

At about 7 months of age, infants listen longer to sentences containing familiar 
words - but not deviant pronunciations of familiar words (Jusczyk & Aslin, 
1995). This finding suggests that infants are able to segment familiar words 
from fluent speech and that they store words in sufficient phonological detail 
to recognize deviations from a familiar word. This finding does not examine 
whether it is, nevertheless, easier for infants to segment words from sentences 
when these words sound similar to familiar words. Across three experiments, the 
present study investigates whether familiarity with a word helps infants segment 
similar-sounding words from fluent speech and if they are able to discriminate 
these similar-sounding words from other words later on. Results suggest that 
word-form familiarity may be a powerful tool bootstrapping further lexical 
acquisition.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12071
PMID: 24118722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1526. Dev Sci. 2013 Nov;16(6):967-79. doi: 10.1111/desc.12075. Epub 2013 Jun 25.

Eye-voice span during rapid automatized naming of digits and dice in Chinese 
normal and dyslexic children.

Pan J(1), Yan M, Laubrock J, Shu H, Kliegl R.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal 
University, China.

We measured Chinese dyslexic and control children's eye movements during rapid 
automatized naming (RAN) with alphanumeric (digits) and symbolic (dice surfaces) 
stimuli. Both types of stimuli required identical oral responses, controlling 
for effects associated with speech production. Results showed that naming dice 
was much slower than naming digits for both groups, but group differences in 
eye-movement measures and in the eye-voice span (i.e. the distance between the 
currently fixated item and the voiced item) were generally larger in digit-RAN 
than in dice-RAN. In addition, dyslexics were less efficient in parafoveal 
processing in these RAN tasks. Since the two RAN tasks required the same 
phonological output and on the assumption that naming dice is less practiced 
than naming digits in general, the results suggest that the translation of 
alphanumeric visual symbols into phonological codes is less efficient in 
dyslexic children. The dissociation of the print-to-sound conversion and 
phonological representation suggests that the degree of automaticity in 
translation from visual symbols to phonological codes in addition to 
phonological processing per se is also critical to understanding dyslexia.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12075
PMID: 24118721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1527. Dev Sci. 2013 Nov;16(6):959-66. doi: 10.1111/desc.12036. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Statistical word learning at scale: the baby's view is better.

Yurovsky D(1), Smith LB, Yu C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, USA.

A key question in early word learning is how children cope with the uncertainty 
in natural naming events. One potential mechanism for uncertainty reduction is 
cross-situational word learning - tracking word/object co-occurrence statistics 
across naming events. But empirical and computational analyses of 
cross-situational learning have made strong assumptions about the nature of 
naming event ambiguity, assumptions that have been challenged by recent analyses 
of natural naming events. This paper shows that learning from ambiguous natural 
naming events depends on perspective. Natural naming events from parent-child 
interactions were recorded from both a third-person tripod-mounted camera and 
from a head-mounted camera that produced a 'child's-eye' view. Following the 
human simulation paradigm, adults were asked to learn artificial language labels 
by integrating across the most ambiguous of these naming events. Significant 
learning was found only from the child's perspective, pointing to the importance 
of considering statistical learning from an embodied perspective.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12036
PMCID: PMC4443688
PMID: 24118720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1528. Dev Sci. 2013 Nov;16(6):850-63. doi: 10.1111/desc.12035. Epub 2013 Feb 9.

Play it again: neural responses to reunion with excluders predicted by 
attachment patterns.

White LO(1), Wu J, Borelli JL, Mayes LC, Crowley MJ.

Author information:
(1)Yale University Child Study Center, USA; Department of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, 
Germany.

Reunion behavior following stressful separations from caregivers is often 
considered the single most sensitive clue to infant attachment patterns. 
Extending these ideas to middle childhood/early adolescence, we examined 
participants' neural responses to reunion with peers who had previously excluded 
them. We recorded event-related potentials among nineteen 11- to 15-year-old 
youth previously classified on attachment interviews (11 secure and 8 
insecure-dismissing) while they played a virtual ball-toss game (Cyberball) with 
peers that involved fair play, exclusion and reunion phases. Compared to secure 
participants, dismissing participants displayed a greater increment in the N2 
during reunion relative to fair play, a neural marker commonly linked to 
expectancy violation. These data suggest a greater tendency toward continued 
expectations of rejection among dismissing children, even after cessation of 
social exclusion. In turn, the link between self-reported ostracism distress and 
neural signs of negative expectancy at reunion was moderated by attachment, such 
that self-reports were discordant with the neural index of expectancy violation 
for dismissing, but not for secure children.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12035
PMID: 24118712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1529. Dev Sci. 2014 Jan;17(1):1-10. doi: 10.1111/desc.12093. Epub 2013 Sep 16.

Parallel development of ERP and behavioural measurements of visual segmentation.

van den Boomen C(1), Lamme VA, Kemner C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, Helmholtz Institute, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands; Department of Developmental Psychology, Utrecht University, The 
Netherlands.

Visual segmentation, a process in which elements are integrated into a form and 
segregated from the background, is known to differ from adults at infancy. The 
further developmental trajectory of this process, and of the underlying brain 
mechanisms, during childhood and adolescence is unknown. The aim of the study 
was to investigate the developmental trajectory of ERP reflections of visual 
segmentation, and to relate this to behavioural performance. One hundred and 
eleven typically developing children from 7 to 18 years of age were divided into 
six age groups. Each child performed two visual tasks. In a texture segmentation 
task, the difference in event-related potential (ERP) response to homogeneous 
(no visual segmentation) and checkered stimuli (visual segmentation) was 
investigated. In addition, behavioural performance on integration of elements 
into contours was measured. Both behavioural and ERP measurements of visual 
segmentation differed from adults in 7-12 year-old children. Behaviourally, 
young children were less able to integrate elements into a contour than older 
children. In addition, a developmental change was present in the ERP pattern 
evoked by homogeneous versus checkered stimuli. The largest differences in 
behaviour and ERPs were found between 7-8- and 9-10-, and between 11-12- and 
13-14-year-old children, indicating the strongest development between those age 
groups. Behavioural as well as ERP measurements at 13-14 years of age showed 
similar results to those of adults. These results reveal that visual 
segmentation continues to develop until early puberty. Only by 13-14 years of 
age, children do integrate and segregate visual information as adults do. These 
results can be interpreted in terms of functional connectivity within the visual 
cortex.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12093
PMID: 24102702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1530. Dev Sci. 2013 Sep;16(5):760-71. doi: 10.1111/desc.12064. Epub 2013 May 28.

Learning to look: probabilistic variation and noise guide infants' eye 
movements.

Tummeltshammer KS(1), Kirkham NZ.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Birkbeck University of London, 
UK.

Young infants have demonstrated a remarkable sensitivity to probabilistic 
relations among visual features (Fiser & Aslin, 2002; Kirkham et al., 2002). 
Previous research has raised important questions regarding the usefulness of 
statistical learning in an environment filled with variability and noise, such 
as an infant's natural world. In an eye-tracking experiment, 8-month-old infants 
viewed sequences of spatio-temporal events with three different transitional 
probabilities (1.0-Deterministic, 0.75-High probability, and 0.5-Low 
probability). Across two between-subjects conditions, the sequences were 
presented with or without competing visual distracters. Results show that as 
transitional probability decreased, infants distributed less attention to the 
predictable locations and their anticipations were less often correct. With no 
distraction, infants had faster saccadic latencies to the high probability 
events; however, with distracters present in the stimulus environment, infants' 
eye movements shifted to favour the deterministic relations. These findings 
suggest that infants integrate multiple sources of variability to guide visual 
attention and facilitate the detection and learning of statistically reliable 
events.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12064
PMID: 24033580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1531. Dev Sci. 2013 Sep;16(5):676-87. doi: 10.1111/desc.12079. Epub 2013 Aug 7.

Socioeconomic status and functional brain development - associations in early 
infancy.

Tomalski P(1), Moore DG, Ribeiro H, Axelsson EL, Murphy E, Karmiloff-Smith A, 
Johnson MH, Kushnerenko E.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Research in Child Development, School of Psychology, University 
of East London, UK; Faculty of Psychology, University of Warsaw, Poland.

Socioeconomic status (SES) impacts on both structural and functional brain 
development in childhood, but how early its effects can be demonstrated is 
unknown. In this study we measured resting baseline EEG activity in the gamma 
frequency range in awake 6-9-month-olds from areas of East London with high 
socioeconomic deprivation. Between-subject comparisons of infants from low- and 
high-income families revealed significantly lower frontal gamma power in infants 
from low-income homes. Similar power differences were found when comparing 
infants according to maternal occupation, with lower occupational status groups 
yielding lower power. Infant sleep, maternal education, length of gestation, and 
birth weight, as well as smoke exposure and bilingualism, did not explain these 
differences. Our results show that the effects of socioeconomic disparities on 
brain activity can already be detected in early infancy, potentially pointing to 
very early risk for language and attention difficulties. This is the first study 
to reveal region-selective differences in functional brain development 
associated with early infancy in low-income families.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12079
PMID: 24033573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1532. Dev Sci. 2013 Jul;16(4):542-53. doi: 10.1111/desc.12048. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

The link between logic, mathematics and imagination: evidence from children with 
developmental dyscalculia and mathematically gifted children.

Morsanyi K(1), Devine A, Nobes A, Szűcs D.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Neuroscience in Education, Department of Psychology, University of 
Cambridge, UK. k.morsanyi@qub.ac.uk

This study examined performance on transitive inference problems in children 
with developmental dyscalculia (DD), typically developing controls matched on 
IQ, working memory and reading skills, and in children with outstanding 
mathematical abilities. Whereas mainstream approaches currently consider DD as a 
domain-specific deficit, we hypothesized that the development of mathematical 
skills is closely related to the development of logical abilities, a 
domain-general skill. In particular, we expected a close link between 
mathematical skills and the ability to reason independently of one's beliefs. 
Our results showed that this was indeed the case, with children with DD 
performing more poorly than controls, and high maths ability children showing 
outstanding skills in logical reasoning about belief-laden problems. 
Nevertheless, all groups performed poorly on structurally equivalent problems 
with belief-neutral content. This is in line with suggestions that abstract 
reasoning skills (i.e. the ability to reason about content without real-life 
referents) develops later than the ability to reason about belief-inconsistent 
fantasy content.A video abstract of this article can be viewed at 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=90DWY3O4xx8.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12048
PMID: 23786472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1533. Dev Sci. 2013 Jul;16(4):499-514. doi: 10.1111/desc.12062. Epub 2013 May 28.

Undifferentiated facial electromyography responses to dynamic, audio-visual 
emotion displays in individuals with autism spectrum disorders.

Rozga A(1), King TZ, Vuduc RW, Robins DL.

Author information:
(1)School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, 85 Fifth 
Street NW, Atlanta, GA 30308, USA. agata@gatech.edu

We examined facial electromyography (fEMG) activity to dynamic, audio-visual 
emotional displays in individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and 
typically developing (TD) individuals. Participants viewed clips of happy, 
angry, and fearful displays that contained both facial expression and affective 
prosody while surface electrodes measured corrugator supercilli and zygomaticus 
major facial muscle activity. Across measures of average and peak activity, the 
TD group demonstrated emotion-selective fEMG responding, with greater relative 
activation of the zygomatic to happy stimuli and greater relative activation of 
the corrugator to fearful stimuli. In contrast, the ASD group largely showed no 
significant differences between zygomatic and corrugator activity across these 
emotions. There were no group differences in the magnitude and timing of fEMG 
response in the muscle congruent to the stimuli. This evidence that fEMG 
responses in ASD are undifferentiated with respect to the valence of the 
stimulus is discussed in light of potential underlying neurobiological 
mechanisms.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12062
PMID: 23786469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1534. Dev Sci. 2013 May;16(3):443-50. doi: 10.1111/desc.12040. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Children with autism can track others' beliefs in a competitive game.

Peterson CC(1), Slaughter V, Peterson J, Premack D.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, 
Australia 4072. candi@psy.uq.edu.au

Theory of mind (ToM) development, assessed via 'litmus' false belief tests, is 
severely delayed in autism, but the standard testing procedure may underestimate 
these children's genuine understanding. To explore this, we developed a novel 
test involving competition to win a reward as the motive for tracking other 
players' beliefs (the 'Dot-Midge task'). Ninety-six children, including 23 with 
autism (mean age: 10.36 years), 50 typically developing 4-year-olds (mean age: 
4.40) and 23 typically developing 3-year-olds (mean age: 3.59) took a standard 
'Sally-Ann' false belief test, the Dot-Midge task (which was closely matched to 
the Sally-Ann task procedure) and a norm-referenced verbal ability test. Results 
revealed that, of the children with autism, 74% passed the Dot-Midge task, yet 
only 13% passed the standard Sally-Ann procedure. A similar pattern of 
performance was observed in the older, but not the younger, typically developing 
control groups. This finding demonstrates that many children with autism who 
fail motivationally barren standard false belief tests can spontaneously use ToM 
to track their social partners' beliefs in the context of a competitive game.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12040
PMID: 23587041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1535. Dev Sci. 2013 May;16(3):428-42. doi: 10.1111/desc.12042. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

The interplay between executive control and motor functioning in Williams 
syndrome.

Hocking DR(1), Thomas D, Menant JC, Porter MA, Smith S, Lord SR, Cornish KM.

Author information:
(1)Monash Child and Adult Development Lab, School of Psychology and Psychiatry, 
Faculty of Medicine, Monash University, Australia. Darren.Hocking@monash.edu

Previous studies suggest that individuals with Williams syndrome (WS), a rare 
genetically based neurodevelopmental disorder, show specific weaknesses in 
visual attention and response inhibition within the visuospatial domain. Here we 
examine the extent to which impairments in attentional control extend to the 
visuomotor domain using a well-validated measure of choice stepping reaction 
time (CSRT) in individuals with WS. We examined the interaction between 
executive control and visually guided stepping using a verbal fluency dual-task 
or Go/NoGo paradigm during CSRT performance. Relationships between dual-task and 
inhibitory stepping and behavioural inattention and hyperactivity were also 
examined. Our results showed clear dual-task costs in stepping response times 
when performing a concurrent cognitive task in the WS group when compared to 
spatial and verbal ability matched typically developing controls. Although no 
group differences in stepping accuracy were observed between the WS and 
typically developing control groups, the WS group showed progressive slowing and 
more variable response times across the duration of the Go/NoGo task. These 
results suggest dysfunction in circuits involved in top-down attentional control 
processes in WS. These findings provide novel evidence that core executive 
control deficits in WS extend to the visuomotor domain, and impact on 
ADHD-related inattentive symptoms.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12042
PMID: 23587040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1536. Dev Sci. 2013 May;16(3):394-408. doi: 10.1111/desc.12027. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Predicting individual differences in low-income children's executive control 
from early to middle childhood.

Cybele Raver C(1), McCoy DC, Lowenstein AE, Pess R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Psychology, New York University, New York, NY 10012, 
USA. cybele.raver@nyu.edu

The present longitudinal study tested the roles of early childhood executive 
control (EC) as well as exposure to poverty-related adversity at family and 
school levels as key predictors of low-income children's EC in elementary school 
(n = 391). Findings suggest that children's EC difficulties in preschool and 
lower family income from early to middle childhood are robust predictors of 
later EC difficulties as rated by teachers in 2nd and 3rd grades. Findings also 
suggest enrollment in unsafe elementary schools is significantly predictive of 
higher levels of teacher-rated EC difficulty, but only for those children who 
showed initially elevated levels of EC difficulty in early childhood. 
Implications for scientific models of cognitive development and poverty-related 
adversity are discussed.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12027
PMCID: PMC3798022
PMID: 23587038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1537. Dev Sci. 2013 May;16(3):377-93. doi: 10.1111/desc.12028. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Objects, numbers, fingers, space: clustering of ventral and dorsal functions in 
young children and adults.

Chinello A(1), Cattani V, Bonfiglioli C, Dehaene S, Piazza M.

Author information:
(1)CIMeC, University of Trento, Italy.

In the primate brain, sensory information is processed along two partially 
segregated cortical streams: the ventral stream, mainly coding for objects' 
shape and identity, and the dorsal stream, mainly coding for objects' 
quantitative information (including size, number, and spatial position). 
Neurophysiological measures indicate that such functional segregation is present 
early on in infancy, and that the two streams follow independent maturational 
trajectories during childhood. Here we collected, in a large sample of young 
children and adults, behavioural measures on an extensive set of functions 
typically associated with either the dorsal or the ventral stream. We then used 
a correlational approach to investigate the presence of inter-individual 
variability resulting in clustering of functions. Results show that dorsal- and 
ventral-related functions follow two uncorrelated developmental trajectories. 
Moreover, within each stream, some functions show age-independent correlations: 
finger gnosis, non-symbolic numerical abilities and spatial abilities within the 
dorsal stream, and object and face recognition abilities within the ventral 
stream. This pattern of clear within-stream cross-task correlation seems to be 
lost in adults, with two notable exceptions: performance in face and object 
recognition on one side, and in symbolic and non-symbolic comparison on the 
other, remain correlated, pointing to distinct shape recognition and quantity 
comparison systems.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12028
PMID: 23587037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1538. Dev Sci. 2013 May;16(3):352-64. doi: 10.1111/desc.12029. Epub 2013 Feb 7.

Development of ordinal sequence perception in infancy.

Lewkowicz DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL 33431, 
USA. lewkowic@fau.edu

Perception of the ordinal position of a sequence element is critical to many 
cognitive and motor functions. Here, the prediction that this ability is based 
on a domain-general perceptual mechanism and, thus, that it emerges prior to the 
emergence of language was tested. Infants were habituated with sequences of 
moving/sounding objects and then tested for the ability to perceive the 
invariant ordinal position of a single element (Experiment 1) or the invariant 
relative ordinal position of two adjacent elements (Experiment 2). Experiment 1 
tested 4- and 6-month-old infants and showed that 4-month-old infants focused on 
conflicting low-level sequence statistics and, therefore, failed to detect the 
ordinal position information, but that 6-month-old infants ignored the 
statistics and detected the ordinal position information. Experiment 2 tested 
6-, 8-, and 10-month-old infants and showed that only 10-month-old infants 
detected relative ordinal position information and that they could only 
accomplish this with the aid of concurrent statistical cues. Together, these 
results indicate that a domain-general ability to detect ordinal position 
information emerges during infancy and that its initial emergence is preceded 
and facilitated by the earlier emergence of the ability to detect statistical 
cues.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12029
PMCID: PMC3954567
PMID: 23587035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1539. Dev Sci. 2013 May;16(3):336-51. doi: 10.1111/desc.12045. Epub 2013 Feb 9.

No bridge too high: infants decide whether to cross based on the probability of 
falling not the severity of the potential fall.

Kretch KS(1), Adolph KE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, New York University, USA.

Do infants, like adults, consider both the probability of falling and the 
severity of a potential fall when deciding whether to cross a bridge? Crawling 
and walking infants were encouraged to cross bridges varying in width over a 
small drop-off, a large drop-off, or no drop-off. Bridge width affects the 
probability of falling, whereas drop-off height affects the severity of the 
potential fall. For both crawlers and walkers, decisions about crossing bridges 
depended only on the probability of falling: As bridge width decreased, attempts 
to cross decreased, and gait modifications and exploration increased, but 
behaviors did not differ between small and large drop-off conditions. Similarly, 
decisions about descent depended on the probability of falling: Infants backed 
or crawled into the small drop-off, but avoided the large drop-off. With no 
drop-off, infants ran straight across. Results indicate that experienced 
crawlers and walkers accurately perceive affordances for locomotion, but they do 
not yet consider the severity of a potential fall when making decisions for 
action.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12045
PMCID: PMC3628785
PMID: 23587034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1540. Dev Sci. 2013 May;16(3):327-35. doi: 10.1111/desc.12018. Epub 2013 Mar 21.

The cradle of causal reasoning: newborns' preference for physical causality.

Mascalzoni E(1), Regolin L, Vallortigara G, Simion F.

Author information:
(1)Department of General Psychology, University of Padova, I-35131 Padova, 
Italy.

Perception of mechanical (i.e. physical) causality, in terms of a cause-effect 
relationship between two motion events, appears to be a powerful mechanism in 
our daily experience. In spite of a growing interest in the earliest causal 
representations, the role of experience in the origin of this sensitivity is 
still a matter of dispute. Here, we asked the question about the innate origin 
of causal perception, never tested before at birth. Three experiments were 
carried out to investigate sensitivity at birth to some visual spatiotemporal 
cues present in a launching event. Newborn babies, only a few hours old, showed 
that they significantly preferred a physical causality event (i.e. Michotte's 
Launching effect) when matched to a delay event (i.e. a delayed launching; 
Experiment 1) or to a non-causal event completely identical to the causal one 
except for the order of the displacements of the two objects involved which was 
swapped temporally (Experiment 3). This preference for the launching event, 
moreover, also depended on the continuity of the trajectory between the objects 
involved in the event (Experiment 2). These results support the hypothesis that 
the human system possesses an early available, possibly innate basic mechanism 
to compute causality, such a mechanism being sensitive to the additive effect of 
certain well-defined spatiotemporal cues present in the causal event 
independently of any prior visual experience.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12018
PMID: 23587033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1541. Dev Sci. 2013 Mar;16(2):269-286. doi: 10.1111/desc.12024.

Speed isn't everything: complex processing speed measures mask individual 
differences and developmental changes in executive control.

Cepeda NJ(1)(2), Blackwell KA(3), Munakata Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, York University, Canada.
(2)LaMarsh Centre for Child and Youth Research, York University, Canada.
(3)Department of Psychology, Hartwick College, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of Colorado Boulder, 
USA.

The rate at which people process information appears to influence many aspects 
of cognition across the lifespan. However, many commonly accepted measures of 
'processing speed' may require goal maintenance, manipulation of information in 
working memory, and decision-making, blurring the distinction between processing 
speed and executive control and resulting in overestimation of processing speed 
contributions to cognition. This concern may apply particularly to studies of 
developmental change, as even seemingly simple processing speed measures may 
require executive processes to keep children and older adults on task. We report 
two new studies and a re-analysis of a published study, testing predictions 
about how different processing speed measures influence conclusions about 
executive control across the lifespan. We find that the choice of processing 
speed measure affects the relationship observed between processing speed and 
executive control, in a manner that changes with age, and that choice of 
processing speed measure affects conclusions about development and the 
relationship among executive control measures. Implications for understanding 
processing speed, executive control, and their development are discussed.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12024
PMCID: PMC3582037
PMID: 23432836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1542. Dev Sci. 2013 Mar;16(2):234-248. doi: 10.1111/desc.12019. Epub 2012 Dec 8.

SES differences in language processing skill and vocabulary are evident at 18 
months.

Fernald A(1), Marchman VA(1), Weisleder A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, USA.

This research revealed both similarities and striking differences in early 
language proficiency among infants from a broad range of advantaged and 
disadvantaged families. English-learning infants (n = 48) were followed 
longitudinally from 18 to 24 months, using real-time measures of spoken language 
processing. The first goal was to track developmental changes in processing 
efficiency in relation to vocabulary learning in this diverse sample. The second 
goal was to examine differences in these crucial aspects of early language 
development in relation to family socioeconomic status (SES). The most important 
findings were that significant disparities in vocabulary and language processing 
efficiency were already evident at 18 months between infants from higher- and 
lower-SES families, and by 24 months there was a 6-month gap between SES groups 
in processing skills critical to language development.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12019
PMCID: PMC3582035
PMID: 23432833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1543. Dev Sci. 2013 Mar;16(2):227-233. doi: 10.1111/desc.12020.

Perception of the motion trajectory of objects from moving cast shadows in 
infant Japanese macaques (Macaca fuscata).

Imura T(1), Adachi I(2), Hattori Y(3), Tomonaga M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Information Systems, Niigata University of International and 
Information Studies, Japan.
(2)Center for International Collaborations and Advanced Studies in 
Primatology(CICASP), Primate Research Institute, Kyoto University, Japan.
(3)Section of Language and Intelligence, Primate Research Institute, Kyoto 
University, Japan.

The shadows cast by moving objects enable human adults and infants to infer the 
motion trajectories of objects. Nonhuman animals must also be able to 
discriminate between objects and their shadows and infer the spatial layout of 
objects from cast shadows. However, the evolutionary and comparative 
developmental origins of sensitivity to cast shadows have not been investigated. 
In this study, we used a familiarity/novelty preferential looking procedure to 
assess the ability of infant macaques, aged 7-24 weeks, to discriminate between 
a 'depth' display containing a ball and cast shadow moving diagonally and an 
'up' display containing a ball with a diagonal trajectory and a shadow with a 
horizontal trajectory. The infant macaques could discriminate the trajectories 
of the balls based on the moving shadows. These findings suggest that the 
ability to perceive the motion trajectory of an object from the moving shadow is 
common to both humans and macaques.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12020
PMID: 23432832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1544. Dev Sci. 2013 Mar;16(2):186-197. doi: 10.1111/desc.12015. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Frontolimbic neural circuitry at 6 months predicts individual differences in 
joint attention at 9 months.

Elison JT(1)(2), Wolff JJ(1), Heimer DC(1), Paterson SJ(3), Gu H(1)(4), Hazlett 
HC(1)(4), Styner M(1)(4)(5), Gerig G(6), Piven J(1)(4); IBIS Network(7).

Author information:
(1)Carolina Institute for Developmental Disabilities, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA.
(2)Division of Humanities and Social Sciences, California Institute of 
Technology, USA.
(3)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA.
(5)Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
USA.
(6)Scientific Computing and Imaging Institute, University of Utah, USA.
(7)Infant Brain Imaging Study (IBIS) Network, The IBIS Network is an NIH funded 
Autism Center of Excellence and consists of a consortium of SEVEN universities 
in the US and Canada. Clinical Sites, University of North Carolina.

Elucidating the neural basis of joint attention in infancy promises to yield 
important insights into the development of language and social cognition, and 
directly informs developmental models of autism. We describe a new method for 
evaluating responding to joint attention performance in infancy that highlights 
the 9- to 10-month period as a time interval of maximal individual differences. 
We then demonstrate that fractional anisotropy in the right uncinate fasciculus, 
a white matter fiber bundle connecting the amygdala to the ventral-medial 
prefrontal cortex and anterior temporal pole, measured in 6-month-olds predicts 
individual differences in responding to joint attention at 9 months of age. The 
white matter microstructure of the right uncinate was not related to receptive 
language ability at 9 months. These findings suggest that the development of 
core nonverbal social communication skills in infancy is largely supported by 
preceding developments within right lateralized frontotemporal brain systems.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12015
PMCID: PMC3582040
PMID: 23432829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1545. Dev Sci. 2013 Mar;16(2):173-185. doi: 10.1111/desc.12014. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Infants' mu suppression during the observation of real and mimicked 
goal-directed actions.

Warreyn P(1), Ruysschaert L(1), Wiersema JR(1), Handl A(2), Pattyn G(1), Roeyers 
H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Clinical and Health Psychology, Ghent University, 
Belgium.
(2)Department of Psychology, Uppsala University, Sweden.

Since their discovery in the early 1990s, mirror neurons have been proposed to 
be related to many social-communicative abilities, such as imitation. However, 
research into the early manifestations of the putative neural mirroring system 
and its role in early social development is still inconclusive. In the current 
EEG study, mu suppression, generally thought to reflect activity in neural 
mirroring systems was investigated in 18- to 30-month-olds during the 
observation of object manipulations as well as mimicked actions. EEG power data 
recorded from frontal, central, and parietal electrodes were analysed. As 
predicted, based on previous research, mu wave suppression was found over 
central electrodes during action observation and execution. In addition, a 
similar suppression was found during the observation of intransitive, mimicked 
hand movements. To a lesser extent, the results also showed mu suppression at 
parietal electrode sites, over all three conditions. Mu wave suppression during 
the observation of hand movements and during the execution of actions was 
significantly correlated with quality of imitation, but not with age or language 
level.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12014
PMID: 23432828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1546. Dev Sci. 2013 Mar;16(2):159-172. doi: 10.1111/desc.12012. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Developmental trends in auditory processing can provide early predictions of 
language acquisition in young infants.

Chonchaiya W(1)(2), Tardif T(1)(3), Mai X(1)(4), Xu L(5), Li M(5), Kaciroti 
N(1), Kileny PR(1)(6), Shao J(5), Lozoff B(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Center for Human Growth and Development, University of Michigan, USA.
(2)Division of Growth and Development, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine, King Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital, Chulalongkorn University, 
Thailand.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, Renmin University, China.
(5)Children's Hospital Zhejiang University School of Medicine, China.
(6)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, University of Michigan, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, University of Michigan, 
USA.

Auditory processing capabilities at the subcortical level have been hypothesized 
to impact an individual's development of both language and reading abilities. 
The present study examined whether auditory processing capabilities relate to 
language development in healthy 9-month-old infants. Participants were 71 
infants (31 boys and 40 girls) with both Auditory Brainstem Response (ABR) and 
language assessments. At 6 weeks and/or 9 months of age, the infants underwent 
ABR testing using both a standard hearing screening protocol with 30 dB clicks 
and a second protocol using click pairs separated by 8, 16, and 64-ms intervals 
presented at 80 dB. We evaluated the effects of interval duration on ABR latency 
and amplitude elicited by the second click. At 9 months, language development 
was assessed via parent report on the Chinese Communicative Development 
Inventory - Putonghua version (CCDI-P). Wave V latency z-scores of the 64-ms 
condition at 6 weeks showed strong direct relationships with Wave V latency in 
the same condition at 9 months. More importantly, shorter Wave V latencies at 9 
months showed strong relationships with the CCDI-P composite consisting of 
phrases understood, gestures, and words produced. Likewise, infants who had 
greater decreases in Wave V latencies from 6 weeks to 9 months had higher CCDI-P 
composite scores. Females had higher language development scores and shorter 
Wave V latencies at both ages than males. Interestingly, when the ABR Wave V 
latencies at both ages were taken into account, the direct effects of gender on 
language disappeared. In conclusion, these results support the importance of 
low-level auditory processing capabilities for early language acquisition in a 
population of typically developing young infants. Moreover, the auditory 
brainstem response in this paradigm shows promise as an electrophysiological 
marker to predict individual differences in language development in young 
children.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12012
PMCID: PMC3582039
PMID: 23432827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1547. Dev Sci. 2013 Mar;16(2):149-158. doi: 10.1111/desc.12011. Epub 2012 Dec 18.

Probabilistic cue combination: less is more.

Yurovsky D(1), Boyer TW(2), Smith LB(3), Yu C(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, Georgia Southern University, USA.
(3)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences and Program in Cognitive 
Science, Indiana University, USA.

Learning about the structure of the world requires learning probabilistic 
relationships: rules in which cues do not predict outcomes with certainty. 
However, in some cases, the ability to track probabilistic relationships is a 
handicap, leading adults to perform non-normatively in prediction tasks. For 
example, in the dilution effect, predictions made from the combination of two 
cues of different strengths are less accurate than those made from the stronger 
cue alone. Here we show that dilution is an adult problem; 11-month-old infants 
combine strong and weak predictors normatively. These results extend and add 
support for the less is more hypothesis: limited cognitive resources can lead 
children to represent probabilistic information differently from adults, and 
this difference in representation can have important downstream consequences for 
prediction.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12011
PMCID: PMC3582171
PMID: 23432826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1548. Dev Sci. 2013 Jan;16(1):136-48. doi: 10.1111/desc.12013. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

ANS acuity and mathematics ability in preschoolers from low-income homes: 
contributions of inhibitory control.

Fuhs MW(1), McNeil NM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame, USA. 
mary.fuhs@vanderbilt.edu

Recent findings by Libertus, Feigenson, and Halberda (2011) suggest that there 
is an association between the acuity of young children's approximate number 
system (ANS) and their mathematics ability before exposure to instruction in 
formal schooling. The present study examined the generalizability and validity 
of these findings in a sample of preschoolers from low-income homes. Children 
attending Head Start (N = 103) completed measures to assess ANS acuity, 
mathematics ability, receptive vocabulary, and inhibitory control. Results 
showed only a weak association between ANS acuity and mathematics ability that 
was reduced to non-significance when controlling for a direct measure of 
receptive vocabulary. Results also revealed that inhibitory control plays an 
important role in the relation between ANS acuity and mathematics ability. 
Specifically, ANS acuity accounted for significant variance in mathematics 
ability over and above receptive vocabulary, but only for ANS acuity trials in 
which surface area conflicted with numerosity. Moreover, this association became 
non-significant when controlling for inhibitory control. These results suggest 
that early mathematical experiences prior to formal schooling may influence the 
strength of the association between ANS acuity and mathematics ability and that 
inhibitory control may drive that association in young children.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12013
PMID: 23278935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1549. Dev Sci. 2013 Jan;16(1):116-23. doi: 10.1111/desc.12007. Epub 2012 Dec 18.

Atypical updating of face representations with experience in children with 
autism.

Ewing L(1), Pellicano E, Rhodes G.

Author information:
(1)ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders, School of 
Psychology, University of Western Australia, Australia. louise.ewing@uwa.edu.au

Face identity aftereffects are significantly diminished in children with autism 
relative to typical children, which may reflect reduced perceptual updating with 
experience. Here, we investigated whether this atypicality also extends to 
non-face stimulus categories, which might signal a pervasive visual processing 
difference in individuals with autism. We used a figural aftereffect task to 
measure directly perceptual updating following exposure to distorted upright 
faces, inverted faces and cars, in typical children and children with autism. A 
size-change between study and test stimuli limited the likelihood that any 
processing atypicalities reflected group differences in adaptation to low-level 
features of the stimuli. Results indicated that, relative to typical children, 
figural aftereffects for upright faces, but not inverted faces or cars, were 
significantly attenuated in children with autism. Moreover, the group difference 
was amplified when we isolated the 'face-selective' component of the 
aftereffect, by partialling out the mid-level shape adaptation common to upright 
and inverted face stimuli. Notably, the aftereffects of typical children were 
disproportionately larger for upright faces than for inverted faces and cars, 
but the magnitude of aftereffects of autistic children was not similarly 
modulated according to stimulus category. These findings are inconsistent with a 
pervasive adaptive coding atypicality relative to typical children, and suggest 
that reduced perceptual updating may constitute a high-level, and possibly 
face-selective, visual processing difference in children with autism.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12007
PMID: 23278933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1550. Dev Sci. 2013 Jan;16(1):67-83. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01192.x. Epub 2012 
Dec 8.

Later language development in narratives in children with perinatal stroke.

Reilly JS(1), Wasserman S, Appelbaum M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, San Diego State University, San Diego, CA 92120, 
USA. reilly1@mail.sdsu.edu

Studies of young children with unilateral perinatal stroke (PS) have confirmed 
the plasticity of the developing brain for acquiring language. While recent 
studies of typically developing children have demonstrated the significant 
development of language well into adolescence, we know little regarding the 
course of language development in the PS group as they mature. Will children 
with PS continue to show the same remarkable plasticity that they exhibited at 
younger ages? In the present paper we investigate later language and discourse 
in children with perinatal stroke (ages 7-16) using spoken personal narrative as 
the discourse context. In contrast to the findings of the discourse studies of 
younger children with PS, children with left hemisphere lesions made more 
morphological errors, used less complex syntax and fewer syntactic types than 
controls; they also produced more impoverished story settings. In contrast, 
those with right hemisphere lesions performed comparably to controls, except in 
their impoverished use of complex syntax. The findings provide insight into the 
nature of later spoken language development in these children, revealing both 
the nature and extent of neuroplasticity for language as well as potential 
regional biases.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01192.x
PMID: 23278928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1551. Dev Sci. 2013 Jan;16(1):47-55. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01193.x. Epub 2012 
Oct 26.

Minimal-group membership influences children's responses to novel experience 
with group members.

Schug MG(1), Shusterman A, Barth H, Patalano AL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Wesleyan University, Middletown, CT 06459, USA. 
mschug@wesleyan.edu

Children, like adults, tend to prefer ingroup over outgroup individuals, but how 
this group bias affects children's processing of information about social groups 
is not well understood. In this study, 5- and 6-year-old children were assigned 
to artificial groups. They observed instances of ingroup and outgroup members 
behaving in either a positive (egalitarian) or a negative (stingy) manner. 
Observations of positive ingroup and negative outgroup behaviors reliably 
reduced children's liking of novel outgroup members, while observations of 
negative ingroup and positive outgroup behaviors had little effect on liking 
ratings. In addition, children successfully identified the more generous group 
only when the ingroup was egalitarian and the outgroup stingy. These data 
provide compelling evidence that children treat knowledge of and experiences 
with ingroups and outgroups differently, and thereby differently interpret 
identical observations of ingroup versus outgroup members.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01193.x
PMID: 23278926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1552. Dev Sci. 2012 Nov;15(6):854-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.2012.01183.x.

Visual size perception and haptic calibration during development.

Gori M(1), Giuliana L, Sandini G, Burr D.

Author information:
(1)Robotics, Brain & Cognitive Sciences Department, Istituto Italiano di 
Tecnologia, Genoa, Italy. monica.gori@iit.it

It is still unclear how the visual system perceives accurately the size of 
objects at different distances. One suggestion, dating back to Berkeley's famous 
essay, is that vision is calibrated by touch. If so, we may expect different 
mechanisms involved for near, reachable distances and far, unreachable 
distances. To study how the haptic system calibrates vision we measured size 
constancy in children (from 6 to 16 years of age) and adults, at various 
distances. At all ages, accuracy of the visual size perception changes with 
distance, and is almost veridical inside the haptic workspace, in agreement with 
the idea that the haptic system acts to calibrate visual size perception. 
Outside this space, systematic errors occurred, which varied with age. Adults 
tended to overestimate visual size of distant objects (over-compensation for 
distance), while children younger than 14 underestimated their size 
(under-compensation). At 16 years of age there seemed to be a transition point, 
with veridical perception of distant objects. When young subjects were allowed 
to touch the object inside the haptic workspace, the visual biases disappeared, 
while older subjects showed multisensory integration. All results are consistent 
with the idea that the haptic system can be used to calibrate visual size 
perception during development, more effectively within than outside the haptic 
workspace, and that the calibration mechanisms are different in children than in 
adults.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.2012.01183.x
PMID: 23106739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1553. Dev Sci. 2012 Nov;15(6):817-29. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01181.x. Epub 2012 
Sep 7.

Origins of the human pointing gesture: a training study.

Matthews D(1), Behne T, Lieven E, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Sheffield, UK. 
danielle.matthews@sheffield.ac.uk

Despite its importance in the development of children's skills of social 
cognition and communication, very little is known about the ontogenetic origins 
of the pointing gesture. We report a training study in which mothers gave 
children one month of extra daily experience with pointing as compared with a 
control group who had extra experience with musical activities. One hundred and 
two infants of 9, 10, or 11 months of age were seen at the beginning, middle, 
and end of this one-month period and tested for declarative pointing and gaze 
following. Infants'ability to point with the index finger at the end of the 
study was not affected by the training but was instead predicted by infants' 
prior ability to follow the gaze direction of an adult. The frequency with which 
infants pointed indexically was also affected by infant gaze following ability 
and, in addition, by maternal pointing frequency in free play, but not by 
training. In contrast, infants' ability to monitor their partner's gaze when 
pointing, and the frequency with which they did so, was affected by both 
training and maternal pointing frequency in free play. These results suggest 
that prior social cognitive advances, rather than adult socialization of 
pointing per se, determine the developmental onset of indexical pointing, but 
socialization processes such as imitation and adult shaping subsequently affect 
both infants' ability to monitor their interlocutor's gaze while they point and 
how frequently infants choose to point.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01181.x
PMID: 23106736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1554. Dev Sci. 2012 Nov;15(6):801-11. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01174.x. Epub 2012 
Sep 12.

The relationship between puberty and social emotion processing.

Goddings AL(1), Burnett Heyes S, Bird G, Viner RM, Blakemore SJ.

Author information:
(1)UCL Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

The social brain undergoes developmental change during adolescence, and pubertal 
hormones are hypothesized to contribute to this development. We used fMRI to 
explore how pubertal indicators (salivary concentrations of testosterone, 
oestradiol and DHEA; pubertal stage; menarcheal status) relate to brain activity 
during a social emotion task. Forty-two females aged 11.1 to 13.7 years 
underwent fMRI scanning while reading scenarios pertaining either to social 
emotions, which require the representation of another person's mental states, or 
to basic emotions, which do not. Pubertal stage and menarcheal status were used 
to assign girls to early or late puberty groups. Across the entire sample, the 
contrast between social versus basic emotion resulted in activity within the 
social brain network, including dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC), the 
posterior superior temporal sulcus, and the anterior temporal cortex (ATC) in 
both hemispheres. Increased hormone levels (independent of age) were associated 
with higher left ATC activity during social emotion processing. More advanced 
age (independent of hormone levels) was associated with lower DMPFC activity 
during social emotion processing. Our results suggest functionally dissociable 
effects of pubertal hormones and age on the adolescent social brain.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01174.x
PMCID: PMC3795450
PMID: 23106734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1555. Dev Sci. 2012 Nov;15(6):775-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01170.x. Epub 2012 
Sep 7.

Biracial and monoracial infant own-race face perception: an eye tracking study.

Gaither SE(1), Pauker K, Johnson SP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Tufts University, 490 Boston Avenue, Medford, MA 
02155, USA. sarah.gaither@tufts.edu

We know that early experience plays a crucial role in the development of face 
processing, but we know little about how infants learn to distinguish faces from 
different races, especially for non-Caucasian populations. Moreover, it is 
unknown whether differential processing of different race faces observed in 
typically studied monoracial infants extends to biracial infants as well. Thus, 
we investigated 3-month-old Caucasian, Asian and biracial (Caucasian-Asian) 
infants' ability to distinguish Caucasian and Asian faces. Infants completed two 
within-subject, infant-controlled habituation sequences and test trials as an 
eye tracker recorded looking times and scanning patterns. Examination of 
individual differences revealed significant positive correlations between 
own-race novelty preference and scanning frequency between eye and mouth regions 
of own-race habituation stimuli for Caucasian and Asian infants, suggesting that 
facility in own-race face discrimination stems from active inspection of 
internal facial features in these groups. Biracial infants, however, showed the 
opposite effect: An 'own-race' novelty preference was associated with reduced 
scanning between eye and mouth regions of 'own-race' habituation stimuli, 
suggesting that biracial infants use a distinct approach to processing 
frequently encountered faces. Future directions for investigating face 
processing development in biracial populations are discussed.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01170.x
PMCID: PMC3490444
PMID: 23106731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1556. Dev Sci. 2012 Nov;15(6):739-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01177.x. Epub 2012 
Sep 26.

Simulating the role of visual selective attention during the development of 
perceptual completion.

Schlesinger M(1), Amso D, Johnson SP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Southern Illinois University Carbondale, 
Carbondale, IL 62903, USA. matthews@siu.edu

We recently proposed a multi-channel, image-filtering model for simulating the 
development of visual selective attention in young infants (Schlesinger, Amso & 
Johnson, 2007). The model not only captures the performance of 3-month-olds on a 
visual search task, but also implicates two cortical regions that may play a 
role in the development of visual selective attention. In the current simulation 
study, we used the same model to simulate 3-month-olds' performance on a second 
measure, the perceptual unity task. Two parameters in the model - corresponding 
to areas in the occipital and parietal cortices - were systematically varied 
while the gaze patterns produced by the model were recorded and subsequently 
analyzed. Three key findings emerged from the simulation study. First, the model 
successfully replicated the performance of 3-month-olds on the unity perception 
task. Second, the model also helps to explain the improved performance of 
2-month-olds when the size of the occluder in the unity perception task is 
reduced. Third, in contrast to our previous simulation results, variation in 
only one of the two cortical regions simulated (i.e. recurrent activity in 
posterior parietal cortex) resulted in a performance pattern that matched 
3-month-olds. These findings provide additional support for our hypothesis that 
the development of perceptual completion in early infancy is promoted by 
progressive improvements in visual selective attention and oculomotor skill.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01177.x
PMCID: PMC4101467
PMID: 23106728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1557. Dev Sci. 2012 Sep;15(5):674-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01172.x. Epub 2012 
Aug 9.

Consolidation of vocabulary is associated with sleep in children.

Henderson LM(1), Weighall AR, Brown H, Gareth Gaskell M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of York, UK.

Although the acquisition of a novel word is apparently rapid, adult research 
suggests that integration of novel and existing knowledge (measured by 
engagement in lexical competition) requires sleep-associated consolidation. We 
present the first investigation of whether a similar time-course dissociation 
characterizes word learning across development. Consistent with previous 
research but counter to adults, 7-12-year-olds showed sleep-associated 
consolidation effects in declarative but not procedural memory. Nevertheless, 
the relationship between sleep and word learning in children was remarkably 
similar to the pattern for adults. Following exposure to nonword competitors 
(e.g. biscal) in the a.m. or p.m., children's ability to recognize and recall 
the nonwords improved only after sleep (after approximately 12-hrs for the p.m. 
group and 24-hrs for the a.m. group), with performance stable 1 week later. 
Novel nonwords only induced lexical competition effects after sleep. These 
findings suggest that children utilize a dual memory system when acquiring and 
integrating new vocabulary and highlight sleep as integral to this process. A 
video abstract of this article can be viewed at 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=youtube_gdata&v=2UNuKCAakOk&gl=GB.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01172.x
PMID: 22925515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1558. Dev Sci. 2012 Sep;15(5):601-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01159.x. Epub 2012 
Jun 27.

Sex moderates associations between prenatal glucocorticoid exposure and human 
fetal neurological development.

Glynn LM(1), Sandman CA.

Author information:
(1)Crean School of Health and Life Sciences, Chapman University, One University 
Drive, Orange, CA 92866, USA. lglynn@chapman.edu

Maternal cortisol levels (at 15, 19, 25, 31 and 37 weeks' gestation) and fetal 
movement response to vibroacoustic stimulation (VAS; at 25, 31 and 37 weeks) 
were assessed in 190 mother-fetus pairs. Fetuses showed a response to the VAS at 
25 weeks and there was evidence of increasing maturation in the response at 31 
and 37 weeks. Early elevations in cortisol predicted a failure to respond to the 
VAS at 25 weeks and later elevations in cortisol were associated with a larger 
response among fetuses when assessed near term. The associations between 
cortisol and VAS emerged earlier and were more apparent among female fetuses 
than among the males. The findings provide support for the role of prenatal 
glucocorticoids in shaping human fetal CNS development.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01159.x
PMID: 22925508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1559. Dev Sci. 2012 Jul;15(4):540-56. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01153.x.

Lifespan differences in nonlinear dynamics during rest and auditory oddball 
performance.

Müller V(1), Lindenberger U.

Author information:
(1)Center for Lifespan Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, 
Berlin, Germany. vmueller@mpib-berlin.mpg.de

Electroencephalographic recordings (EEG) were used to assess age-associated 
differences in nonlinear brain dynamics during both rest and auditory oddball 
performance in children aged 9.0-12.8 years, younger adults, and older adults. 
We computed nonlinear coupling dynamics and dimensional complexity, and also 
determined spectral alpha power as an indicator of cortical reactivity. During 
rest, both nonlinear coupling and spectral alpha power decreased with age, 
whereas dimensional complexity increased. In contrast, when attending to the 
deviant stimulus, nonlinear coupling increased with age, and complexity 
decreased. Correlational analyses showed that nonlinear measures assessed during 
auditory oddball performance were reliably related to an independently assessed 
measure of perceptual speed. We conclude that cortical dynamics during rest and 
stimulus processing undergo substantial reorganization from childhood to old 
age, and propose that lifespan age differences in nonlinear dynamics during 
stimulus processing reflect lifespan changes in the functional organization of 
neuronal cell assemblies.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01153.x
PMID: 22709403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1560. Dev Sci. 2012 Jul;15(4):516-27. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01147.x. Epub 2012 
Mar 29.

Neural correlates of socioeconomic status in the developing human brain.

Noble KG(1), Houston SM, Kan E, Sowell ER.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University, USA. kgn2106@columbia.edu

Socioeconomic disparities in childhood are associated with remarkable 
differences in cognitive and socio-emotional development during a time when 
dramatic changes are occurring in the brain. Yet, the neurobiological pathways 
through which socioeconomic status (SES) shapes development remain poorly 
understood. Behavioral evidence suggests that language, memory, social-emotional 
processing, and cognitive control exhibit relatively large differences across 
SES. Here we investigated whether volumetric differences could be observed 
across SES in several neural regions that support these skills. In a sample of 
60 socioeconomically diverse children, highly significant SES differences in 
regional brain volume were observed in the hippocampus and the amygdala. In 
addition, SES × age interactions were observed in the left superior temporal 
gyrus and left inferior frontal gyrus, suggesting increasing SES differences 
with age in these regions. These results were not explained by differences in 
gender, race or IQ. Likely mechanisms include differences in the home linguistic 
environment and exposure to stress, which may serve as targets for intervention 
at a time of high neural plasticity.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01147.x
PMCID: PMC6554027
PMID: 22709401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1561. Dev Sci. 2012 Jul;15(4):496-505. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01150.x. Epub 
2012 Apr 5.

The best time to acquire new skills: age-related differences in implicit 
sequence learning across the human lifespan.

Janacsek K(1), Fiser J, Nemeth D.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychology, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.

Implicit skill learning underlies obtaining not only motor, but also cognitive 
and social skills through the life of an individual. Yet, the ontogenetic 
changes in humans' implicit learning abilities have not yet been characterized, 
and, thus, their role in acquiring new knowledge efficiently during development 
is unknown. We investigated such learning across the lifespan, between 4 and 85 
years of age with an implicit probabilistic sequence learning task, and we found 
that the difference in implicitly learning high- vs. low-probability 
events--measured by raw reaction time (RT)--exhibited a rapid decrement around 
age of 12. Accuracy and z-transformed data showed partially different 
developmental curves, suggesting a re-evaluation of analysis methods in 
developmental research. The decrement in raw RT differences supports an 
extension of the traditional two-stage lifespan skill acquisition model: in 
addition to a decline above the age 60 reported in earlier studies, sensitivity 
to raw probabilities and, therefore, acquiring new skills is significantly more 
effective until early adolescence than later in life. These results suggest that 
due to developmental changes in early adolescence, implicit skill learning 
processes undergo a marked shift in weighting raw probabilities vs. more complex 
interpretations of events, which, with appropriate timing, prove to be an 
optimal strategy for human skill learning.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01150.x
PMCID: PMC3383816
PMID: 22709399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflict of interest and 
have no financial disclosure.


1562. Dev Sci. 2012 Jul;15(4):482-95. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01141.x. Epub 2012 
Feb 23.

Infant word segmentation and childhood vocabulary development: a longitudinal 
analysis.

Singh L(1), Steven Reznick J, Xuehua L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, National University of Singapore, Singapore. 
psyls@nus.edu.sg

Infants begin to segment novel words from speech by 7.5 months, demonstrating an 
ability to track, encode and retrieve words in the context of larger units. 
Although it is presumed that word recognition at this stage is a prerequisite to 
constructing a vocabulary, the continuity between these stages of development 
has not yet been empirically demonstrated. The goal of the present study is to 
investigate whether infant word segmentation skills are indeed related to later 
lexical development. Two word segmentation tasks, varying in complexity, were 
administered in infancy and related to childhood outcome measures. Outcome 
measures consisted of age-normed productive vocabulary percentiles and a measure 
of cognitive development. Results demonstrated a strong degree of association 
between infant word segmentation abilities at 7 months and productive vocabulary 
size at 24 months. In addition, outcome groups, as defined by median vocabulary 
size and growth trajectories at 24 months, showed distinct word segmentation 
abilities as infants. These findings provide the first prospective evidence 
supporting the predictive validity of infant word segmentation tasks and suggest 
that they are indeed associated with mature word knowledge. A video abstract of 
this article can be viewed at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jxzLi5oLZQ8.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01141.x
PMCID: PMC3383643
PMID: 22709398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1563. Dev Sci. 2012 Jul;15(4):474-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01145.x. Epub 2012 
Apr 19.

Sparing of sensitivity to biological motion but not of global motion after early 
visual deprivation.

Hadad BS(1), Maurer D, Lewis TL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, 
Israel. bhadad@univ.haifa.ac.il

Patients deprived of visual experience during infancy by dense bilateral 
congenital cataracts later show marked deficits in the perception of global 
motion (dorsal visual stream) and global form (ventral visual stream). We 
expected that they would also show marked deficits in sensitivity to biological 
motion, which is normally processed in the superior temporal sulcus via input 
from both the dorsal and ventral streams. When tested on the same day for 
sensitivity to biological motion and to global motion at two speeds (4 and 18° 
s(-1)), patients, as expected, displayed a large deficit in processing global 
motion at both speeds. Surprisingly, they performed normally in discriminating 
biological motion from scrambled displays, tolerating as much noise as their 
age-matched controls. Networks bypassing damaged portions of the dorsal and the 
ventral streams must mediate the spared sensitivity to biological motion after 
early visual deprivation.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01145.x
PMID: 22709397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1564. Dev Sci. 2012 May;15(3):398-407. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01142.x. Epub 
2012 Mar 7.

Active music classes in infancy enhance musical, communicative and social 
development.

Gerry D(1), Unrau A, Trainor LJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Neuroscience & Behaviour, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON L8S 4K1, Canada.

Previous studies suggest that musical training in children can positively affect 
various aspects of development. However, it remains unknown as to how early in 
development musical experience can have an effect, the nature of any such 
effects, and whether different types of music experience affect development 
differently. We found that random assignment to 6 months of active participatory 
musical experience beginning at 6 months of age accelerates acquisition of 
culture-specific knowledge of Western tonality in comparison to a similar amount 
of passive exposure to music. Furthermore, infants assigned to the active 
musical experience showed superior development of prelinguistic communicative 
gestures and social behaviour compared to infants assigned to the passive 
musical experience. These results indicate that (1) infants can engage in 
meaningful musical training when appropriate pedagogical approaches are used, 
(2) active musical participation in infancy enhances culture-specific musical 
acquisition, and (3) active musical participation in infancy impacts social and 
communication development.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01142.x
PMID: 22490179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1565. Dev Sci. 2012 May;15(3):384-97. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01136.x. Epub 2012 
Feb 28.

Ethnic differences in mother-infant language and gestural communications are 
associated with specific skills in infants.

Tamis-LeMonda CS(1), Song L, Leavell AS, Kahana-Kalman R, Yoshikawa H.

Author information:
(1)New York University, Steinhardt School of Culture, Education and Human 
Development, Department of Applied Psychology, 246 Greene Street, 410W, New 
York, NY 10003, USA. catherine.tamis-lemonda@nyu.edu

We examined gestural and verbal interactions in 226 mother-infant pairs from 
Mexican, Dominican, and African American backgrounds when infants were 14 months 
and 2 years of age, and related these interactions to infants' emerging skills. 
At both ages, dyads were video-recorded as they shared a wordless number book, a 
wordless emotion book, and beads and string. We coded mothers' and infants' 
gestures and language/vocalizations. Each maternal utterance was coded as 
referential (e.g. 'That's a bead') or regulatory (e.g. 'Put it there'). Mothers 
reported on infants' gestural, receptive, and productive vocabularies at 14 
months, and infants were assessed on receptive language, expressive language, 
and action sequencing and imitation at 2 years of age. Mothers of the three 
ethnicities differed in their gesturing, distributions of the two types of 
language, and coupling of language and gestures. Mothers' ethnicity, language, 
and gestures were differentially associated with infants' 2-year skills. 
Mother-infant communicative interactions are foundational to infant learning and 
development, and ethnic differences in modes of early communication portend 
divergent pathways in the development of specific skills.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01136.x
PMID: 22490178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1566. Dev Sci. 2012 May;15(3):373-83. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01132.x. Epub 2012 
Feb 28.

Sex differences in fetal habituation.

Hepper PG(1), Dornan JC, Lynch C.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Queen’s University, Belfast BT7 INN, UK. 
p.hepper@qub.ac.uk

There is some evidence for sex differences in habituation in the human fetus, 
but it is unknown whether this is due to differences in central processing 
(habituation) or in more peripheral processes, sensory or motor, involved in the 
response. This study examined whether the sex of the fetus influenced auditory 
habituation at 33 weeks of gestation, and whether this was due to differences in 
habituation or in the sensory or motor components using a set of four 
experiments. The first experiment found that female fetuses required 
significantly fewer stimulus presentations to habituate than males. The second 
experiment revealed no difference in the spontaneous motor behaviour of male and 
female fetuses. The third experiment examined auditory intensity thresholds for 
the stimuli used to habituate the fetus. No differences in thresholds were found 
between males and females, although there was inter-individual variability in 
thresholds. A final experiment, using stimuli individualized for that particular 
fetus' auditory intensity threshold, found that female fetuses habituated faster 
than males. In combination, the studies reveal that habituation in the human 
fetus is affected by sex and this is due to a difference in central 'information 
processing' of the stimuli rather than peripheral aspects of the response. It is 
argued that male and female fetuses present different neurobehavioural 
developmental trajectories, with females more advanced at 33 weeks than males. 
This study suggests that research examining prenatal behaviour should consider 
the factor of fetal sex. This may be particularly pertinent where there is an 
intention to use the results diagnostically.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01132.x
PMID: 22490177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1567. Dev Sci. 2012 May;15(3):345-58. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01131.x. Epub 2012 
Jan 18.

Electrophysiological evidence of altered memory processing in children 
experiencing early deprivation.

Güler OE(1), Hostinar CE, Frenn KA, Nelson CA, Gunnar MR, Thomas KM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Augsburg College, 2211 Riverside Ave., Minneapolis, 
MN 55454, USA. guler@augsburg.edu

Associations between early deprivation and memory functioning were examined in 
9- to 11-year-old children. Children who had experienced prolonged institutional 
care prior to adoption were compared to children who were adopted early from 
foster care and children reared in birth families. Measures included the Paired 
Associates Learning task from the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test and 
Automated Battery (CANTAB) and a continuous recognition memory task during which 
ERPs were also recorded. Children who experienced prolonged institutionalization 
showed deficits in both behavioral memory measures as well as an attenuated P300 
parietal memory effect. Results implicate memory function as one of the domains 
that may be negatively influenced by early deprivation in the form of 
institutional care.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01131.x
PMCID: PMC4321862
PMID: 22490175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1568. Dev Sci. 2012 Mar;15(2):292-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01127.x. Epub 2011 
Dec 3.

Infants generate goal-based action predictions.

Cannon EN(1), Woodward AL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Development, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 
20742, USA. ecannon@umd.edu

Predicting the actions of others is critical to smooth social interactions. 
Prior work suggests that both understanding and anticipation of goal-directed 
actions appears early in development. In this study, on-line goal prediction was 
tested explicitly using an adaptation of Woodward's (1998) paradigm for an 
eye-tracking task. Twenty 11-month-olds were familiarized to movie clips of a 
hand reaching to grasp one of two objects. Then object locations were swapped, 
and the hand made an incomplete reach between the objects. Here, infants 
reliably made their first look from the hand to the familiarized goal object, 
now in a new location. A separate control condition of 20 infants familiarized 
to the same movements of an unfamiliar claw revealed the opposite pattern: 
reliable prediction to the familiarized location, rather than the familiarized 
object. This study suggests that by 11 months infants actively use goal analysis 
to generate on-line predictions of an agent's next action.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01127.x
PMCID: PMC3612028
PMID: 22356184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1569. Dev Sci. 2012 Mar;15(2):165-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01100.x. Epub 2011 
Nov 2.

Gesture in the developing brain.

Dick AS(1), Goldin-Meadow S, Solodkin A, Small SL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Florida International University, Modesto A. 
Maidique Campus, Deuxieme Maison 296B, 11200 S. W. 8th Street, Miami, FL 33199, 
USA. adick@fiu.edu

Speakers convey meaning not only through words, but also through gestures. 
Although children are exposed to co-speech gestures from birth, we do not know 
how the developing brain comes to connect meaning conveyed in gesture with 
speech. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to address this 
question and scanned 8- to 11-year-old children and adults listening to stories 
accompanied by hand movements, either meaningful co-speech gestures or 
meaningless self-adaptors. When listening to stories accompanied by both types 
of hand movement, both children and adults recruited inferior frontal, inferior 
parietal, and posterior temporal brain regions known to be involved in 
processing language not accompanied by hand movements. There were, however, 
age-related differences in activity in posterior superior temporal sulcus 
(STSp), inferior frontal gyrus, pars triangularis (IFGTr), and posterior middle 
temporal gyrus (MTGp) regions previously implicated in processing gesture. Both 
children and adults showed sensitivity to the meaning of hand movements in IFGTr 
and MTGp, but in different ways. Finally, we found that hand movement meaning 
modulates interactions between STSp and other posterior temporal and inferior 
parietal regions for adults, but not for children. These results shed light on 
the developing neural substrate for understanding meaning contributed by 
co-speech gesture.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01100.x
PMCID: PMC3515080
PMID: 22356173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1570. Dev Sci. 2012 Jan;15(1):131-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01101.x. Epub 2011 
Nov 2.

Children's essentialist reasoning about language and race.

Kinzler KD(1), Dautel JB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, 5848 S. University Ave., 
Chicago, IL 60637, USA. kinzler@uchicago.edu

Across four studies, we directly compared children's essentialist reasoning 
about the stability of race and language throughout an individual's lifespan. 
Monolingual English-speaking children were presented with a series of images of 
children who were either White or Black; each face was paired with a voice clip 
in either English or French. Participants were asked which of two adults each 
target child would grow up to be - one who was a 'match' to the target child in 
race but not language, and the other a 'match' in language but not race. Nine- 
to 10-year-old European American children chose the race-match, rather than the 
language-match. In contrast, 5-6-year-old European American children in both 
urban, racially diverse, and rural, racially homogeneous environments chose the 
language-match, even though this necessarily meant that the target child would 
transform racial categories. Although surprising in light of adult reasoning, 
these young children demonstrated an intuition about the relative stability of 
an individual's language compared to her racial group membership. Yet, 
5-6-year-old African American children, similar to the older European American 
children, chose the race-match, suggesting that membership in a racial minority 
group may highlight children's reasoning about race as a stable category. 
Theoretical implications for our understanding of children's categorization of 
human kinds are discussed.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01101.x
PMID: 22251299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1571. Dev Sci. 2012 Jan;15(1):123-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01099.x. Epub 2011 
Nov 2.

Developmental changes in the discrimination of dynamic human actions in infancy.

Loucks J(1), Sommerville JA.

Author information:
(1)Jeff Loucks, Department of Psychology, University of Washington, Box 351525, 
Seattle, WA 98195-1525, USA. jloucks@uw.edu

Recent evidence suggests that adults selectively attend to features of action, 
such as how a hand contacts an object, and less to configural properties of 
action, such as spatial trajectory, when observing human actions. The current 
research investigated whether this bias develops in infancy. We utilized a 
habituation paradigm to assess 4-month-old and 10-month-old infants' 
discrimination of action based on featural, configural, and temporal sources of 
action information. Younger infants were able to discriminate changes to all 
three sources of information, but older infants were only able to reliably 
discriminate changes to featural information. These results highlight a 
previously unknown aspect of early action processing, and suggest that action 
perception may undergo a developmental process akin to perceptual narrowing.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01099.x
PMCID: PMC3261474
PMID: 22251298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1572. Dev Sci. 2012 Jan;15(1):43-53. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01096.x. Epub 2011 
Oct 28.

Does causal action facilitate causal perception in infants younger than 6 months 
of age?

Rakison DH(1), Krogh L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15232, 
USA. rakison@andrew.cmu.edu

Previous research has established that infants are unable to perceive causality 
until 6¼ months of age. The current experiments examined whether infants' 
ability to engage in causal action could facilitate causal perception prior to 
this age. In Experiment 1, 4½-month-olds were randomly assigned to engage in 
causal action experience via Velcro sticky mittens or not engage in causal 
action because they wore non-sticky mittens. Both groups were then tested in the 
visual habituation paradigm to assess their causal perception. Infants who 
engaged in causal action - but not those without this causal action experience - 
perceived the habituation events as causal. Experiment 2 used a similar design 
to establish that 4½-month-olds are unable to generalize their own causal action 
to causality observed in dissimilar objects. These data are the first to 
demonstrate that infants under 6 months of age can perceive causality, and have 
implications for the mechanisms underlying the development of causal perception.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01096.x
PMID: 22251291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1573. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):453-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00995.x.

Three-month-old infants attribute goals to a non-human agent.

Luo Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 
65211, USA. luoy@missouri.edu

The present research examined whether 3-month-old infants, the youngest found so 
far to engage in goal-related reasoning about human agents, would also act as if 
they attribute goals to a novel non-human agent, a self-propelled box. In two 
experiments, the infants seemed to have interpreted the box’s actions as 
goal-directed after seeing the box approach object A as opposed to object B 
during familiarization. They thus acted as though they expected the box to 
maintain this goal and responded with increased attention when the box 
approached object B during test. In contrast, when object B was absent during 
familiarization and introduced afterwards, the infants’ responses were 
consistent with their having recognized that they had no information to predict 
which of the two objects the box should choose during test and therefore 
responded similarly when the box approached either object. However, if object B 
was absent during familiarization and object A was in different positions but 
the box persistently approached it, thus demonstrating equifinal variations in 
its actions, the infants again acted as though they attributed to the box a goal 
directed towards object A and expected the box to maintain this goal even when 
object B was introduced and hence responded with prolonged looking when the box 
failed to do so during test. These results are consistent with the notion that 
(a) infants as young as 3 months appear to attribute goals to both human and 
non-human agents, and (b) even young infants can use certain behavioral cues, 
e.g. equifinal variations in agents’ actions, to make inferences about agents’ 
goals.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00995.x
PMID: 22213913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1574. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):431-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00993.x.

‘No fair, copycat!’: what children’s response to plagiarism tells us about their 
understanding of ideas.

Olson KR(1), Shaw A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. 
kristina.olson@yale.edu

Adults believe that plagiarizing ideas is wrong, which requires an understanding 
that others can have ideas and that it is wrong to copy them. In order to test 
when this understanding emerges, we investigated when children begin to think 
plagiarism is wrong. In Study 1, children aged 7, 9 and 11 years old, as well as 
adults, disliked someone who plagiarized compared to someone who drew an 
original drawing or someone who drew an identical picture by chance. Study 2 
investigated the same question with younger children, focusing on children aged 
3–6 years old. Children aged 5–6 years old evaluated plagiarizers negatively 
relative to unique drawers, but 3–4-year-olds did not. Study 3 replicated the 
findings from Study 2 and found that children justify their negative evaluations 
of plagiarizers by mentioning concerns over copying. These experiments provide 
evidence that, by age 5 years old, children understand that others have ideas 
and dislike the copying of these ideas.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00993.x
PMID: 22213911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1575. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):165-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00958.x.

What you learn is what you see: using eye movements to study infant 
cross-situational word learning.

Yu C(1), Smith LB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 
Bloomington, IN 47405, USA. chenyu@indiana.edu

Recent studies show that both adults and young children possess powerful 
statistical learning capabilities to solve the word-to-world mapping problem. 
However, the underlying mechanisms that make statistical learning possible and 
powerful are not yet known. With the goal of providing new insights into this 
issue, the research reported in this paper used an eye tracker to record the 
moment-by-moment eye movement data of 14-month-old babies in statistical 
learning tasks. Various measures are applied to such fine-grained temporal data, 
such as looking duration and shift rate (the number of shifts in gaze from one 
visual object to the other) trial by trial, showing different eye movement 
patterns between strong and weak statistical learners. Moreover, an 
information-theoretic measure is developed and applied to gaze data to quantify 
the degree of learning uncertainty trial by trial. Next, a simple associative 
statistical learning model is applied to eye movement data and these simulation 
results are compared with empirical results from young children, showing strong 
correlations between these two. This suggests that an associative learning 
mechanism with selective attention can provide a cognitively plausible model of 
cross-situational statistical learning. The work represents the first steps in 
using eye movement data to infer underlying real-time processes in statistical 
word learning.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00958.x
PMCID: PMC5387766
PMID: 22213894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1576. Dev Sci. 2011 Nov;14(6):1431-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01087.x. Epub 
2011 Sep 30.

Development of neural systems for processing social exclusion from childhood to 
adolescence.

Bolling DZ(1), Pitskel NB, Deen B, Crowley MJ, Mayes LC, Pelphrey KA.

Author information:
(1)Yale Child Study Center, Yale University, USA.

Adolescence is a period of development in which peer relationships become 
especially important. A computer-based game (Cyberball) has been used to explore 
the effects of social exclusion in adolescents and adults. The current 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study used Cyberball to extend 
prior work to the cross-sectional study of younger children and adolescents (7 
to 17 years), identifying age-related changes in the neural correlates of social 
exclusion across the important transition from middle childhood into 
adolescence. Additionally, a control task illustrated the specificity of these 
age-related changes for social exclusion as distinct from expectancy violation 
more generally. During exclusion, activation in and functional connectivity 
between ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and ventral anterior cingulate cortex 
increased with age. These effects were specific to social exclusion and did not 
exist for expectancy violation. Our results illustrate developmental changes 
from middle childhood through adolescence in both affective and regulatory brain 
regions during social exclusion.

2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01087.x
PMCID: PMC4457505
PMID: 22010901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1577. Dev Sci. 2011 Nov;14(6):1301-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01076.x. Epub 
2011 Aug 2.

How infants relate looker and object: evidence for a perceptual learning account 
of gaze following in infancy.

Paulus M(1).

Author information:
(1)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. m.paulus@donders.ru.nl

In two experiments, it was investigated how preverbal infants perceive the 
relationship between a person and an object she is looking at. More 
specifically, it was examined whether infants interpret an adult's 
object-directed gaze as a marker of an intention to act or whether they relate 
the person and the object via a mechanism of associative learning. 
Fourteen-month-old infants observed an adult gazing repeatedly at one of two 
objects. When the adult reached out to grasp this object in the test trials, 
infants showed no systematic visual anticipations to it (i.e. first visual 
anticipatory gaze shifts) but only displayed longer looking times for this 
object than for another before her hand reached the object. However, they showed 
visual anticipatory gaze shifts to the correct action target when only the 
grasping action was presented. The second experiment shows that infants also 
look longer at the object a person has been gazing at when the person is still 
present, but is not performing any action during the test trials. Looking 
preferences for the objects were reversed, however, when the person was absent 
during the test trials. This study provides evidence for the claim that infants 
around 1 year of age do not employ other people's object-directed gaze to 
anticipate future actions, but to establish person-object associations. The 
implications of this finding for theoretical conceptions of infants' 
social-cognitive development are discussed.

2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01076.x
PMID: 22010890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1578. Dev Sci. 2011 Nov;14(6):1283-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01072.x. Epub 
2011 Aug 2.

Race preferences in children: insights from South Africa.

Shutts K(1), Kinzler KD, Katz RC, Tredoux C, Spelke ES.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, WI 53706, USA. 
kshutts@wisc.edu

Minority-race children in North America and Europe often show less own-race 
favoritism than children of the majority (White) race, but the reasons for this 
asymmetry are unresolved. The present research tested South African children in 
order to probe the influences of group size, familiarity, and social status on 
children's race-based social preferences. We assessed South African children's 
preferences for members of their country's majority race (Blacks) compared to 
members of other groups, including Whites, who ruled South Africa until 1994 and 
who remain high in status. Black children (3-13 years) tested in a Black 
township preferred people of their own gender but not race. Moreover, Black, 
White, and multiracial children (4-9 years) tested in a racially diverse primary 
school showed in-group bias by gender but not by race: all favored people who 
were White. Relative familiarity and numerical majority/minority status 
therefore do not fully account for children's racial attitudes, which vary with 
the relative social status of different racial groups.

2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01072.x
PMCID: PMC3392197
PMID: 22010888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1579. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1245-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01071.x.

Correlated longitudinal changes across linguistic, achievement, and psychomotor 
domains in early childhood: evidence for a global dimension of development.

Rhemtulla M(1), Tucker-Drob EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin, USA. mijke@ku.edu

An important question within developmental psychology concerns the extent to 
which the maturational gains that children make across multiple diverse domains 
of functioning can be attributed to global (domain-general) developmental 
processes. The present study investigated this question by examining the extent 
to which individual differences in change across children's development in five 
different domains are correlated. Multivariate growth-curve models were fit to 
longitudinal data on linguistic, mathematics, reading, gross motor, and fine 
motor skills in 8950 children ranging in age from 44 to 86 months (3.7 years to 
7.2 years). All five rates of change were positively intercorrelated. A common 
factor accounted for 42% of the individual differences in change. These results 
suggest that a global dimension underlies substantial proportions of cognitive 
and psychomotor development.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01071.x
PMCID: PMC5955711
PMID: 21884339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1580. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1176-84. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01067.x. Epub 
2011 Jul 27.

Developing cultural differences in face processing.

Kelly DJ(1), Liu S, Rodger H, Miellet S, Ge L, Caldara R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Royal Holloway, University of London, UK. 
david.kelly@rhul.ac.uk

Perception and eye movements are affected by culture. Adults from Eastern 
societies (e.g. China) display a disposition to process information 
holistically, whereas individuals from Western societies (e.g. Britain) process 
information analytically. Recently, this pattern of cultural differences has 
been extended to face processing. Adults from Eastern cultures fixate centrally 
towards the nose when learning and recognizing faces, whereas adults from 
Western societies spread fixations across the eye and mouth regions. Although 
light has been shed on how adults can fixate different areas yet achieve 
comparable recognition accuracy, the reason why such divergent strategies exist 
is less certain. Although some argue that culture shapes strategies across 
development, little direct evidence exists to support this claim. Additionally, 
it has long been claimed that face recognition in early childhood is largely 
reliant upon external rather than internal face features, yet recent studies 
have challenged this theory. To address these issues, we tested children aged 
7-12 years of age from the UK and China with an old/new face recognition 
paradigm while simultaneously recording their eye movements. Both populations 
displayed patterns of fixations that were consistent with adults from their 
respective cultural groups, which 'strengthened' across development as qualified 
by a pattern classifier analysis. Altogether, these observations suggest that 
cultural forces may indeed be responsible for shaping eye movements from early 
childhood. Furthermore, fixations made by both cultural groups almost 
exclusively landed on internal face regions, suggesting that these features, and 
not external features, are universally used to achieve face recognition in 
childhood.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01067.x
PMID: 21884332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1581. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1134-41. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01062.x. Epub 
2011 Jun 18.

One-month-old human infants learn about the social world while they sleep.

Reeb-Sutherland BC(1), Fifer WP, Byrd DL, Hammock EA, Levitt P, Fox NA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Development, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 
20742, USA. breeb@umd.edu

Although infants display preferences for social stimuli early in their lives, we 
know relatively little about the mechanisms of infant learning about the social 
world. In the current set of studies, 1-month-old infants underwent an adapted 
eyeblink conditioning paradigm to examine learning to both 'social' and 
non-social cues. While infants were asleep, they were presented with either a 
'social' stimulus (a female voice) or one of two non-social stimuli (tone or 
backward voice) followed by an airpuff presented to the eyelid. Infants in the 
experimental groups displayed increased learning across trials, regardless of 
stimulus type. However, infants conditioned to the 'social' stimulus showed 
increased learning compared to infants conditioned to either of the non-social 
stimuli. These results suggest a mechanism by which learning about the social 
world occurs early in life and the power of ecologically valid cues in 
facilitating that learning.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01062.x
PMCID: PMC3177152
PMID: 21884328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1582. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1119-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01061.x. Epub 
2011 Jun 18.

Does adolescent risk taking imply weak executive function? A prospective study 
of relations between working memory performance, impulsivity, and risk taking in 
early adolescence.

Romer D(1), Betancourt LM, Brodsky NL, Giannetta JM, Yang W, Hurt H.

Author information:
(1)Annenberg Public Policy Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 
19104-3806, USA. dromer@asc.upenn.edu

Studies of brain development suggest that the increase in risk taking observed 
during adolescence may be due to insufficient prefrontal executive function 
compared to a more rapidly developing subcortical motivation system. We examined 
executive function as assessed by working memory ability in a community sample 
of youth (n = 387, ages 10 to 12 at baseline) in three annual assessments to 
determine its relation to two forms of impulsivity (sensation seeking and acting 
without thinking) and a wide range of risk and externalizing behavior. Using 
structural equation modeling, we tested a model in which differential activation 
of the dorsal and ventral striatum produces imbalance in the function of these 
brain regions. For youth high in sensation seeking, both regions were predicted 
to develop with age. However, for youth high in the tendency to act without 
thinking, the ventral striatum was expected to dominate. The model predicted 
that working memory ability would exhibit (1) early weakness in youth high in 
acting without thinking but (2) growing strength in those high in sensation 
seeking. In addition, it predicted that (3) acting without thinking would be 
more strongly related to risk and externalizing behavior than sensation seeking. 
Finally, it predicted that (4) controlling for acting without thinking, 
sensation seeking would predict later increases in risky and externalizing 
behavior. All four of these predictions were confirmed. The results indicate 
that the rise in sensation seeking that occurs during adolescence is not 
accompanied by a deficit in executive function and therefore requires different 
intervention strategies from those for youth whose impulsivity is characterized 
by early signs of acting without thinking.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01061.x
PMCID: PMC3177153
PMID: 21884327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1583. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1075-88. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01058.x. Epub 
2011 Jun 18.

Neural correlates of coherent and biological motion perception in autism.

Koldewyn K(1), Whitney D, Rivera SM.

Author information:
(1)Medical Investigation of Neurodevelopmental Disorders (MIND) Institute, 
University of California-Davis, USA. kamik@MIT.edu

Recent evidence suggests those with autism may be generally impaired in visual 
motion perception. To examine this, we investigated both coherent and biological 
motion processing in adolescents with autism employing both psychophysical and 
fMRI methods. Those with autism performed as well as matched controls during 
coherent motion perception but had significantly higher thresholds for 
biological motion perception. The autism group showed reduced posterior Superior 
Temporal Sulcus (pSTS), parietal and frontal activity during a biological motion 
task while showing similar levels of activity in MT+/V5 during both coherent and 
biological motion trials. Activity in MT+/V5 was predictive of individual 
coherent motion thresholds in both groups. Activity in dorsolateral prefrontal 
cortex (DLPFC) and pSTS was predictive of biological motion thresholds in 
control participants but not in those with autism. Notably, however, activity in 
DLPFC was negatively related to autism symptom severity. These results suggest 
that impairments in higher-order social or attentional networks may underlie 
visual motion deficits observed in autism.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01058.x
PMCID: PMC3800149
PMID: 21884323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1584. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1066-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01060.x. Epub 
2011 Jun 18.

Age differences in visual working memory capacity: not based on encoding 
limitations.

Cowan N(1), AuBuchon AM, Gilchrist AL, Ricker TJ, Saults JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 
65211, USA. CowanN@missouri.edu

Why does visual working memory performance increase with age in childhood? One 
recent study (Cowan et al., 2010b) ruled out the possibility that the basic 
cause is a tendency in young children to clutter working memory with 
less-relevant items (within a concurrent array, colored items presented in one 
of two shapes). The age differences in memory performance, however, 
theoretically could result from inadequate encoding of the briefly presented 
array items by younger children. We replicated the key part of the procedure in 
children 6-8 and 11-13 years old and college students (total N = 90), but with a 
much slower, sequential presentation of the items to ensure adequate encoding. 
We also required verbal responses during encoding to encourage or discourage 
labeling of item information. Although verbal labeling affected performance, age 
differences persisted across labeling conditions, further supporting the 
existence of a basic growth in capacity.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01060.x
PMCID: PMC3177168
PMID: 21884322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1585. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):1046-58. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01054.x. Epub 
2011 Apr 25.

The effects of an afterschool physical activity program on working memory in 
preadolescent children.

Kamijo K(1), Pontifex MB, O'Leary KC, Scudder MR, Wu CT, Castelli DM, Hillman 
CH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Kinesiology and Community Health, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. kamijo@illinois.edu

The present study examined the effects of a 9-month randomized control physical 
activity intervention aimed at improving cardiorespiratory fitness on changes in 
working memory performance in preadolescent children relative to a waitlist 
control group. Participants performed a modified Sternberg task, which 
manipulated working memory demands based on encoding set sizes, while task 
performance and the contingent negative variation (CNV) event-related brain 
potential were measured. Analyses revealed that the physical activity 
intervention led to increases in cardiorespiratory fitness and improved 
Sternberg task performance. Further, the beneficial effects of the physical 
activity intervention were greater for a task condition requiring greater 
working memory demands. In addition, the intervention group exhibited larger 
initial CNV at the frontal electrode site, relative to the waitlist group at 
post-test; an effect not observed during the pre-test. These results indicate 
that increases in cardiorespiratory fitness are associated with improvements in 
the cognitive control of working memory in preadolescent children.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01054.x
PMCID: PMC3177170
PMID: 21884320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1586. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):980-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01053.x. Epub 2011 
Apr 25.

Toddlers with Autism Spectrum Disorder are more successful at visual search than 
typically developing toddlers.

Kaldy Z(1), Kraper C, Carter AS, Blaser E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, MA 
02125, USA. zsuzsa.kaldy@umb.edu

Plaisted, O'Riordan and colleagues (Plaisted, O'Riordan & Baron-Cohen, 1998; 
O'Riordan, 2004) showed that school-age children and adults with Autism Spectrum 
Disorder (ASD) are faster at finding targets in certain types of visual search 
tasks than typical controls. Currently though, there is very little known about 
the visual search skills of very young children (1-3-year-olds) - either 
typically developing or with ASD. We used an eye-tracker to measure looking 
behavior, providing fine-grained measures of visual search in 2.5-year-old 
toddlers with and without ASD (this representing the age by which many children 
may first receive a diagnosis of ASD). Importantly, our paradigm required no 
verbal instructions or feedback, making the task appropriate for toddlers who 
are pre- or nonverbal. We found that toddlers with ASD were more successful at 
finding the target than typically developing, age-matched controls. Further, our 
paradigm allowed us to estimate the number of items scrutinized per trial, 
revealing that for large set size conjunctive search, toddlers with ASD 
scrutinized as many as twice the number of items as typically developing 
toddlers, in the same amount of time.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01053.x
PMCID: PMC3177163
PMID: 21884314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1587. Dev Sci. 2011 Sep;14(5):949-59. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01044.x. Epub 2011 
Jun 8.

Rapid reacquisition of native phoneme contrasts after disuse: you do not always 
lose what you do not use.

Singh L(1), Liederman J, Mierzejewski R, Barnes J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, National University of Singapore, Singapore. 
psyls@nus.edu.sg

Infants attune to their birth language during the second half of infancy. 
However, internationally adopted children are often uniquely required to attune 
to their birth language, and then reattune to their adoptive language. Children 
who were adopted from India into America at ages 6-60 months (N = 8) and had 
minimal further exposure to their birth languages were compared to age-matched 
American non-adopted controls. Without training, neither group could 
discriminate a phonemic contrast that occurs in their birth language but not in 
English. However, after training on the contrast, the adopted group (N = 8) 
improved significantly and discriminated the contrast more accurately than their 
non-adopted peers. While English had explicitly replaced the birth language of 
the adopted sample, traces of early exposure conferred privileges on subsequent 
learning. These findings are consistent with behavioral and neurophysiological 
data from animals that have identified some of the mechanisms underlying such a 
'retention without further use' phenomenon.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01044.x
PMID: 21884311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1588. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):881-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01038.x. Epub 2011 
Mar 23.

Prenatal cigarette exposure and infant learning stimulation as predictors of 
cognitive control in childhood.

Mezzacappa E(1), Buckner JC, Earls F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Children's Hospital Boston, USA. 
enrico.mezzacappa@childrens.harvard.edu

Prenatal exposures to neurotoxins and postnatal parenting practices have been 
shown to independently predict variations in the cognitive development and 
emotional-behavioral well-being of infants and children. We examined the 
independent contributions of prenatal cigarette exposure and infant learning 
stimulation, as well as their inter-relationships in predicting variations in 
the proficiency of executive attention, a core element of cognitive control and 
self-regulation. Participants were an ethnic-racially, socio-economically 
diverse sample of 249 children followed from birth in the Project on Human 
Development in Chicago Neighborhoods. We obtained histories of prenatal exposure 
to alcohol, cigarettes, and other drugs, and we assessed socio-economic status 
and learning stimulation during a home visit when the participants were infants. 
In childhood we utilized the Attention Networks Test to assess the proficiency 
of executive attention during two home visits, one year apart. Accounting for 
age, SES, prenatal alcohol exposure, and baseline performance, we found that 
prenatal cigarette exposure impaired the speed of executive attention. Infant 
learning stimulation mitigated these effects, and predicted better accuracy of 
executive attention as well, suggestive of both protective and health promoting 
effects. Effect sizes for these relations, whether examined independently or by 
their inter-relationships, were comparable to if not greater in magnitude than 
the effects of age on speed and accuracy, highlighting the importance of these 
very early experiences in shaping the proficiency of self-regulation. Since 
executive attention is central to cognitive control and self-regulation, 
previously described relations between prenatal cigarette exposure, parenting 
practices, and some forms of childhood psychopathology may be contingent on how 
early learning stimulation contributes to the proficiency of executive attention 
through direct and indirect effects. Furthermore, considering the prolonged 
developmental trajectory of executive attention, interventions to support 
provision of learning stimulation may mitigate poor outcomes for some at-risk 
children by promoting development of more proficient executive attention.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01038.x
PMCID: PMC3117204
PMID: 21676107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1589. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):865-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01036.x. Epub 2011 
Apr 4.

Constraints on infants' musical rhythm perception: effects of interval ratio 
complexity and enculturation.

Hannon EE(1), Soley G, Levine RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Nevada, USA. erin.hannon@unlv.edu

Effects of culture-specific experience on musical rhythm perception are evident 
by 12 months of age, but the role of culture-general rhythm processing 
constraints during early infancy has not been explored. Using a habituation 
procedure with 5- and 7-month-old infants, we investigated effects of temporal 
interval ratio complexity on discrimination of standard from novel musical 
patterns containing 200-ms disruptions. Infants were tested in three ratio 
conditions: simple (2:1), which is typical in Western music, complex (3:2), 
which is typical in other musical cultures, and highly complex (7:4), which is 
relatively rare in music throughout the world. Unlike adults and older infants, 
whose accuracy was predicted by familiarity, younger infants were influenced by 
ratio complexity, as shown by their successful discrimination in the simple and 
complex conditions but not in the highly complex condition. The findings suggest 
that ratio complexity constrains rhythm perception even prior to the acquisition 
of culture-specific biases.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01036.x
PMID: 21676105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1590. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):832-47. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01032.x. Epub 2011 
Mar 24.

Socioeconomic gradients and child development in a very low income population: 
evidence from Madagascar.

Fernald LC(1), Weber A, Galasso E, Ratsifandrihamanana L.

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, USA. 
fernald@berkeley.edu

Our objectives were to document and examine socioeconomic gradients across a 
comprehensive set of child development measures in a population living in 
extreme poverty, and to interpret these gradients in light of findings from the 
neuroscience literature. We assessed a nationally representative sample of 
3-6-year-old children (n = 1332) from 150 communities of Madagascar using 
standard tests of development. We found that children whose families were in the 
top wealth quintile or whose mothers had secondary education performed 
significantly better across almost all measures of cognitive and language 
development and had better linear growth compared with children of women in the 
lowest wealth quintile or women with no education. These differences between 
children of low and high socioeconomic position were greatest for receptive 
language, working memory, and memory of phrases. The mean difference in the 
scores between children in the highest and lowest socioeconomic status 
categories doubled between age 3 and age 6, and the biggest gaps across 
socioeconomic position by age 6 were in receptive language and sustained 
attention. Our results suggest that even within the context of extreme poverty, 
there are strong associations between family socioeconomic status and child 
development outcomes among preschool children, and that the language and 
executive function domains exhibit the largest gradients.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01032.x
PMID: 21676102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1591. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):752-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01021.x. Epub 2010 
Dec 16.

Maternal and paternal plasma, salivary, and urinary oxytocin and parent-infant 
synchrony: considering stress and affiliation components of human bonding.

Feldman R(1), Gordon I, Zagoory-Sharon O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and the Gonda Brain Sciences Center, Bar-Ilan 
University, Israel. feldman@mail.biu.ac.il

Studies in mammals have implicated the neuropeptide oxytocin (OT) in processes 
of bond formation and stress modulation, yet the involvement of OT in human 
bonding throughout life remains poorly understood. We assessed OT in the plasma, 
saliva, and urine of 112 mothers and fathers interacting with their 
4-6-month-old infants. Parent-infant interactions were micro-coded for parent 
and child's social behaviors and for the temporal coordination of their 
socio-affective cues. Parents were interviewed regarding their attachment to the 
infant and reported on bonding to own parents, romantic attachment, and 
parenting stress. Results indicated that OT in plasma (pOT) and saliva (sOT) 
were inter-related and were unrelated to OT in urine (uOT). pOT and sOT in 
mothers and fathers were associated with parent and child's social engagement, 
affect synchrony, and positive communicative sequences between parent and child. 
uOT was related to moments of interactive stress among mothers only, indexed by 
the co-occurrence of infant negative engagement and mother re-engagement 
attempts. pOT and sOT were associated with mothers' and fathers' attachment 
relationships throughout life: to own parents, partner, and infant, whereas uOT 
correlated with relationship anxiety and parenting stress among mothers only. 
Similar to other mammals, OT is involved in human attachment and contingent 
parenting. The dual role of OT in stress and affiliation underscores its complex 
involvement in processes of social bonding throughout life.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01021.x
PMID: 21676095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1592. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):649-59. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01008.x. Epub 2010 
Nov 11.

Learning to read changes children's phonological skills: evidence from a latent 
variable longitudinal study of reading and nonword repetition.

Nation K(1), Hulme C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, UK. 
Kate.nation@psy.ox.ac.uk

Individual differences in nonword repetition are associated with language and 
literacy development, but few studies have considered the extent to which 
learning to read influences phonological skills as indexed by nonword repetition 
performance. We explored this question using a latent variable longitudinal 
design. Reading, oral language and nonword repetition were assessed in 215 
children at age 6 years and one year later at age 7. Reading at 6 years 
predicted growth in nonword repetition between 6 and 7 years, independent of the 
effects of oral language skills and the autoregressive effect of nonword 
repetition at 6 years, but nonword repetition was not a longitudinal predictor 
of the growth of reading. These findings demonstrate that learning to read has a 
powerful effect on children's language processing systems. We consider how 
learning to read might influence speech processing, and discuss the implications 
of our findings for theoretical accounts of reading disorder.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01008.x
PMID: 21676086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1593. Dev Sci. 2011 Jul;14(4):623-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01003.x. Epub 2010 
Nov 29.

Tracking speakers' false beliefs: is theory of mind available earlier for word 
learning?

Houston-Price C(1), Goddard K, Séclier C, Grant SC, Reid CJ, Boyden LE, Williams 
R.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology & Clinical Language Sciences, University of Reading, UK. 
c.houston-price@reading.ac.uk

Happé and Loth (2002) describe word learning as a 'privileged domain' in the 
development of a theory of mind. We test this claim in a series of experiments 
based on the Sally-Anne paradigm. Three- and 4-year-old children's ability to 
represent others' false beliefs was investigated in tasks that required the 
child either to predict the actions of a protagonist in a story or to learn the 
meaning of a new word used by the protagonist. Experiment 1 replicated previous 
findings of better performance in a false belief word-learning task compared to 
a false belief action-prediction task. However, systematic manipulation of the 
task parameters in Experiments 2 and 3 revealed that this performance 
discrepancy disappeared when tasks were equated in their 'referential pull' 
(Perner, Rendl & Garnham, 2007). We conclude that the notion of a precocious 
theory of mind for word learning is not required to explain dissociations in 
performance on false belief tasks.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01003.x
PMID: 21676084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1594. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):242-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00973.x.

Impact of second-language experience in infancy: brain measures of first- and 
second-language speech perception.

Conboy BT(1), Kuhl PK.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Learning & Brain Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA 98195-7988, USA. btconboy@gmail.com

Language experience 'narrows' speech perception by the end of infants' first 
year, reducing discrimination of non-native phoneme contrasts while improving 
native-contrast discrimination. Previous research showed that declines in 
non-native discrimination were reversed by second-language experience provided 
at 9-10 months, but it is not known whether second-language experience affects 
first-language speech sound processing. Using event-related potentials (ERPs), 
we examined learning-related changes in brain activity to Spanish and English 
phoneme contrasts in monolingual English-learning infants pre- and post-exposure 
to Spanish from 9.5-10.5 months of age. Infants showed a significant 
discriminatory ERP response to the Spanish contrast at 11 months 
(post-exposure), but not at 9 months (pre-exposure). The English contrast 
elicited an earlier discriminatory response at 11 months than at 9 months, 
suggesting improvement in native-language processing. The results show that 
infants rapidly encode new phonetic information, and that improvement in native 
speech processing can occur during second-language learning in infancy.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00973.x
PMCID: PMC3075538
PMID: 21499512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1595. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):F1-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01035.x.

Peers increase adolescent risk taking by enhancing activity in the brain's 
reward circuitry.

Chein J(1), Albert D, O'Brien L, Uckert K, Steinberg L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA. 
jchein@temple.edu

The presence of peers increases risk taking among adolescents but not adults. We 
posited that the presence of peers may promote adolescent risk taking by 
sensitizing brain regions associated with the anticipation of potential rewards. 
Using fMRI, we measured brain activity in adolescents, young adults, and adults 
as they made decisions in a simulated driving task. Participants completed one 
task block while alone, and one block while their performance was observed by 
peers in an adjacent room. During peer observation blocks, adolescents 
selectively demonstrated greater activation in reward-related brain regions, 
including the ventral striatum and orbitofrontal cortex, and activity in these 
regions predicted subsequent risk taking. Brain areas associated with cognitive 
control were less strongly recruited by adolescents than adults, but activity in 
the cognitive control system did not vary with social context. Results suggest 
that the presence of peers increases adolescent risk taking by heightening 
sensitivity to the potential reward value of risky decisions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01035.x
PMCID: PMC3075496
PMID: 21499511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1596. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):372-84. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00986.x.

Adaptation to novel accents by toddlers.

White KS(1), Aslin RN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester, USA. 
white@uwaterloo.ca

Word recognition is a balancing act: listeners must be sensitive to phonetic 
detail to avoid confusing similar words, yet, at the same time, be flexible 
enough to adapt to phonetically variable pronunciations, such as those produced 
by speakers of different dialects or by non-native speakers. Recent work has 
demonstrated that young toddlers are sensitive to phonetic detail during word 
recognition; pronunciations that deviate from the typical phonological form lead 
to a disruption of processing. However, it is not known whether young word 
learners show the flexibility that is characteristic of adult word recognition. 
The present study explores whether toddlers can adapt to artificial accents in 
which there is a vowel category shift with respect to the native language. 
18-20-month-olds heard mispronunciations of familiar words (e.g., vowels were 
shifted from [a] to [æ]: "dog" pronounced as "dag"). In test, toddlers were 
tolerant of mispronunciations if they had recently been exposed to the same 
vowel shift, but not if they had been exposed to standard pronunciations or 
other vowel shifts. The effects extended beyond particular items heard in 
exposure to words sharing the same vowels. These results indicate that, like 
adults, toddlers show flexibility in their interpretation of phonological 
detail. Moreover, they suggest that effects of top-down knowledge on the 
reinterpretation of phonological detail generalize across the phono-lexical 
system.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00986.x
PMCID: PMC3071623
PMID: 21479106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1597. Dev Sci. 2011 May;14(3):614-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01009.x. Epub 2010 
Nov 11.

Late maturation of auditory perceptual learning.

Huyck JJ(1), Wright BA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northwestern University, 
Evanston, IL 60208-3550, USA. 

Adults can improve their performance on many perceptual tasks with training, but 
when does the response to training become mature? To investigate this question, 
we trained 11-year-olds, 14-year-olds and adults on a basic auditory task 
(temporal-interval discrimination) using a multiple-session training regimen 
known to be effective for adults. The adolescents all began with performance in 
the adult range. However, while all of the adults improved across sessions, none 
of the 11-year-olds and only half of the 14-year-olds did. The adolescents who 
failed to learn did so even though the 10-session training regimen provided 
twice the number of sessions required by adults to reach asymptotic performance. 
Further, over the course of each session, the performance of the adults was 
stable but that of the adolescents, including those who learned, deteriorated. 
These results demonstrate that the processes that underlie perceptual learning 
can continue to develop well into adolescence.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01009.x
PMCID: PMC3107547
PMID: 21477199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1598. Dev Sci. 2011 May;14(3):602-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01006.x. Epub 2010 
Nov 2.

Lexical stress and phonetic processing in word learning in 20- to 24-month-old 
English-learning children.

Floccia C(1), Nazzi T, Austin K, Arreckx F, Goslin J.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Plymouth, UK. 
caroline.floccia@plymouth.ac.uk

To investigate the interaction between segmental and supra-segmental 
stress-related information in early word learning, two experiments were 
conducted with 20- to 24-month-old English-learning children. In an adaptation 
of the object categorization study designed by Nazzi and Gopnik (2001), children 
were presented with pairs of novel objects whose labels differed by their 
initial consonant (Experiment 1) or their medial consonant (Experiment 2). Words 
were produced with a stress initial (trochaic) or a stress final (iambic) 
pattern. In both experiments successful word learning was established when the 
to-be-remembered contrast was embedded in a stressed syllable, but not when 
embedded in unstressed syllables. This was independent of the overall word 
pattern, trochaic or iambic, or the location of the phonemic contrast, 
word-initial or -medial. Results are discussed in light of the use of phonetic 
information in early lexical acquisition, highlighting the role of lexical 
stress and ambisyllabicity in early word processing.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01006.x
PMID: 21477198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1599. Dev Sci. 2011 May;14(3):502-15. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00998.x. Epub 2010 
Nov 11.

Tracking and quantifying objects and non-cohesive substances.

Van Marle K(1), Wynn K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, USA. vanmarlek@missouri.edu

The present study tested infants' ability to assess and compare quantities of a 
food substance. Contrary to previous findings, the results suggest that by 10 
months of age infants can quantify non-cohesive substances, and that this 
ability is different in important ways from their ability to quantify discrete 
objects: (1) In contrast to even much younger infants' ability to discriminate 
discrete quantities that differ by a 1:2 ratio, infants here required a 1:4 
ratio in order to reliably select the larger of two substance quantities. And 
(2), unlike with objects, infants required multiple cues in order to determine 
which of two quantities of substance was larger. Moreover, (3) although 
14.5-month-olds were able to compare amounts of substance in memory, 10- to 
12-month-olds were limited to comparing visible amounts of substance. These 
findings are discussed in light of the mechanisms that may underlie infants' 
quantification of objects and substances.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00998.x
PMID: 21477190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1600. Dev Sci. 2011 May;14(3):464-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00937.x.

Statistical learning in typically developing children: the role of age and speed 
of stimulus presentation.

Arciuli J(1), Simpson IC.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Sydney, Australia. 
jarciuli@usyd.edu.au

It is possible that statistical learning (SL) plays a role in almost every 
mental activity. Indeed, research on SL has grown rapidly over recent decades in 
an effort to better understand perception and cognition. Yet, there remain gaps 
in our understanding of how SL operates, in particular with regard to its 
(im)mutability. Here, we investigated whether participant-related variables 
(such as age) and task-related variables (such as speed of stimulus 
presentation) affect visual statistical learning (VSL) in typically developing 
children. We tested 183 participants ranging in age from 5 to 12 years and 
compared three speeds of presentation (using stimulus durations of 800, 400 and 
200 msecs). A multiple regression analysis revealed significant effects of both 
age and speed of presentation - after attention during familiarization and 
gender had been taken into consideration. VSL followed a developmental 
trajectory whereby learning increased with age. The amount of learning increased 
with longer presentation times (as shown by Turk-Browne, Jungé & Scholl, 2005, 
in their study of adults). There was no significant interaction between the two 
variables. These findings assist in elucidating the nature of statistical 
learning itself. While statistical learning can be observed in very young 
children and at remarkably fast presentation times, participant- and 
task-related variables do impact upon this type of learning. The findings 
reported here may serve to enhance our understanding of individual differences 
in the cognitive and perceptual processes that are thought to rely, at least in 
part, on SL (e.g. language processing and object recognition).

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00937.x
PMID: 21477186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1601. Dev Sci. 2011 Mar;14(2):306-18. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00981.x.

Developmental continuity? Crawling, cruising, and walking.

Adolph KE(1), Berger SE, Leo AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA. 
karen.adolph@nyu.edu

This research examined developmental continuity between "cruising" (moving 
sideways holding onto furniture for support) and walking. Because cruising and 
walking involve locomotion in an upright posture, researchers have assumed that 
cruising is functionally related to walking. Study 1 showed that most infants 
crawl and cruise concurrently prior to walking, amassing several weeks of 
experience with both skills. Study 2 showed that cruising infants perceive 
affordances for locomotion over an adjustable gap in a handrail used for manual 
support, but despite weeks of cruising experience, cruisers are largely 
oblivious to the dangers of gaps in the floor beneath their feet. Study 3 
replicated the floor-gap findings for infants taking their first independent 
walking steps, and showed that new walkers also misperceive affordances for 
locomoting between gaps in a handrail. The findings suggest that weeks of 
cruising do not teach infants a basic fact about walking: the necessity of a 
floor to support their body. Moreover, this research demonstrated that 
developmental milestones that are temporally contiguous and structurally similar 
might have important functional discontinuities.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00981.x
PMCID: PMC3050596
PMID: 21399716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1602. Dev Sci. 2011 Jan;14(1):148-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00967.x.

A developmental neuroimaging investigation of the change paradigm.

Thomas LA(1), Hall JM, Skup M, Jenkins SE, Pine DS, Leibenluft E.

Author information:
(1)Mood and Anxiety Program, National Institute of Mental Health, National 
Institutes of Health/DHHS, 15K North Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. 
tlaura@mail.nih.gov

This neuroimaging study examines the development of cognitive flexibility using 
the Change task in a sample of youths and adults. The Change task requires 
subjects to inhibit a prepotent response and substitute an alternative response, 
and the task incorporates an algorithm that adjusts task difficulty in response 
to subject performance. Data from both groups combined show a network of 
prefrontal and parietal areas that are active during the task. For adults vs. 
youths, a distributed network was more active for successful change trials 
versus go, baseline, or unsuccessful change trials. This network included areas 
involved in rule representation, retrieval (lateral PFC), and switching (medial 
PFC and parietal regions). These results are consistent with data from previous 
task-switching experiments and inform developmental understandings of cognitive 
flexibility.

Published 2010. This article is a US Government work and is in the public domain 
in the USA.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00967.x
PMCID: PMC3036172
PMID: 21159096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1603. Dev Sci. 2011 Jan;14(1):69-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00960.x.

Implicit sequence learning in deaf children with cochlear implants.

Conway CM(1), Pisoni DB, Anaya EM, Karpicke J, Henning SC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Saint Louis University, 3511 Laclede Avenue, St. 
Louis, MO 63103, USA. cconway6@slu.edu

Deaf children with cochlear implants (CIs) represent an intriguing opportunity 
to study neurocognitive plasticity and reorganization when sound is introduced 
following a period of auditory deprivation early in development. Although it is 
common to consider deafness as affecting hearing alone, it may be the case that 
auditory deprivation leads to more global changes in neurocognitive function. In 
this paper, we investigate implicit sequence learning abilities in deaf children 
with CIs using a novel task that measured learning through improvement to 
immediate serial recall for statistically consistent visual sequences. The 
results demonstrated two key findings. First, the deaf children with CIs showed 
disturbances in their visual sequence learning abilities relative to the 
typically developing normal-hearing children. Second, sequence learning was 
significantly correlated with a standardized measure of language outcome in the 
CI children. These findings suggest that a period of auditory deprivation has 
secondary effects related to general sequencing deficits, and that disturbances 
in sequence learning may at least partially explain why some deaf children still 
struggle with language following cochlear implantation.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00960.x
PMCID: PMC3050521
PMID: 21159089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1604. Dev Sci. 2011 Jan;14(1):18-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00953.x.

Executive functions and child problem behaviors are sensitive to family 
disruption: a study of children of mothers working overseas.

Hewage C(1), Bohlin G, Wijewardena K, Lindmark G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Sri Jayewardenepura, Sri Lanka.

Mothers in Sri Lanka are increasingly seeking overseas employment, resulting in 
disruption of the childcare environment. The present study was designed to 
evaluate the effects of maternal migration on executive function (EF) and 
behavior, thereby also contributing to the scientific understanding of 
environmental effects--or more specifically family effects--on children's 
neurocognitive functioning. A sample of 60 healthy 11-year-old children whose 
mothers had been working overseas for more than 1 year formed the study group, 
and a comparison group was recruited from the same schools. Evaluations were 
made twice over a 1-year interval with regard to the EF components inhibition 
and working memory as well as teacher ratings of internalizing and externalizing 
behavior. The children in the study group were found to have poorer EF and 
higher levels of externalizing behaviors. A composite score of inhibition 
partially mediated the group effect on externalizing behavior. Current home 
environment was assessed using the HOME scale, was poorer for the study group 
and was related to EF, but not to behavior problems. Keeping in mind the 
correlational nature of the present data, our results were discussed in relation 
to studies showing cognitive effects of stress.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00953.x
PMID: 21159084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1605. Dev Sci. 2010 Nov;13(6):913-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00956.x.

Facial expressions modulate the ontogenetic trajectory of gaze-following among 
monkeys.

Teufel C(1), Gutmann A, Pirow R, Fischer J.

Author information:
(1)Brain Mapping Unit, Behavioural and Clinical Neuroscience Institute, 
Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, UK.

Gaze-following, the tendency to direct one's attention to locations looked at by 
others, is a crucial aspect of social cognition in human and nonhuman primates. 
Whereas the development of gaze-following has been intensely studied in human 
infants, its early ontogeny in nonhuman primates has received little attention. 
Combining longitudinal and cross-sectional observational data from Barbary 
macaques at 'La Forêt des Singes', we show here that gaze-following among 
conspecifics develops within the first year of life with a rapid increase 
between 5 and 6 months, reaching adult levels at 1 year. Sex, rank, and 
relatedness of the animal whose gaze the subject followed did not affect 
gaze-following rates. Interestingly, however, the behavior was enhanced in all 
age classes if a gaze-cue was accompanied by a facial expression. Furthermore, 
the effect of facial expressions had a modulatory influence on the ontogenetic 
trajectory of gaze-following, suggesting that it is of functional significance 
in the development of the behavior. Follow-up analyses revealed that one 
specific facial expression that is given in response to social interactions 
between third parties was particularly efficient in eliciting gaze-following 
responses, indicating the importance of cues that are able to guide the 
acquisition of social information. Taken together, these results suggest that 
the development and the operation of gaze-following are tuned to the social and 
physical characteristics of a species' environment.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00956.x
PMID: 20977562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1606. Dev Sci. 2010 Sep 1;13(5):779-89. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00929.x.

Synergies between processing and memory in children's reading span.

Towse JN(1), Hitch GJ, Horton N, Harvey K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Lancaster University, Bailrigg, Lancaster LA1 4YF, 
UK. j.towse@lancaster.ac.uk

Previous research has established the relevance of working memory for cognitive 
development. Yet the factors responsible for shaping performance in the complex 
span tasks used to assess working memory capacity are not fully understood. We 
report a study of reading span in 7- to 11-year-old children that addresses 
several contemporary theoretical issues. We demonstrate that both the timing and 
the accuracy of recall are affected by the presence or absence of a semantic 
connection between the processing requirement and the memoranda. Evidence that 
there can be synergies between processing and memory argues against the view 
that complex span simply measures the competition between these activities. We 
also demonstrate a consistent relationship between the rate of completing 
processing operations (sentence reading) and recall accuracy. At the same time, 
the shape and strength of this function varies with the task configuration. 
Taken together, these results demonstrate the potential for reconstructive 
influences to shape working memory performance among children.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00929.x
PMID: 20712744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1607. Dev Sci. 2010 Jul;13(4):648-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00922.x.

Executive function and the development of belief-desire psychology.

Rakoczy H(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychology & Courant Research Centre, 'Evolution of Social 
Behaviour', University of Göttingen, Germany. 
hannes.rakoczy@psych.uni-goettingen.de

In two studies children's performance on tasks requiring the ascription of 
beliefs and desires was investigated in relation to their executive function. 
Study 1 (n = 80) showed that 3- and 4-year-olds were more proficient at 
ascribing subjective, mutually incompatible desires and desire-dependent 
emotions to two persons than they were at ascribing analogous subjective false 
beliefs. Replicating previous findings, executive function was correlated with 
false-belief ascription. However, executive function was also correlated with 
performance on tasks requiring subjective desire understanding. Study 2 (n = 54) 
replicated these results, and showed that the correlations hold even if age, 
vocabulary and working memory are controlled for. The results are discussed with 
regard to the role of executive function and conceptual change in theory of mind 
development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00922.x
PMID: 20590728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1608. Dev Sci. 2010 Jul;13(4):636-47. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00920.x.

Narrative skill in children with early unilateral brain injury: a possible limit 
to functional plasticity.

Demir OE(1), Levine SC, Goldin-Meadow S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, USA.

Children with pre- or perinatal brain injury (PL) exhibit marked plasticity for 
language learning. Previous work has focused mostly on the emergence of 
earlier-developing skills, such as vocabulary and syntax. Here we ask whether 
this plasticity for earlier-developing aspects of language extends to more 
complex, later-developing language functions by examining the narrative 
production of children with PL. Using an elicitation technique that involves 
asking children to create stories de novo in response to a story stem, we 
collected narratives from 11 children with PL and 20 typically developing (TD) 
children. Narratives were analysed for length, diversity of the vocabulary used, 
use of complex syntax, complexity of the macro-level narrative structure and use 
of narrative evaluation. Children's language performance on vocabulary and 
syntax tasks outside the narrative context was also measured. Findings show that 
children with PL produced shorter stories, used less diverse vocabulary, 
produced structurally less complex stories at the macro-level, and made fewer 
inferences regarding the cognitive states of the story characters. These 
differences in the narrative task emerged even though children with PL did not 
differ from TD children on vocabulary and syntax tasks outside the narrative 
context. Thus, findings suggest that there may be limitations to the plasticity 
for language functions displayed by children with PL, and that these limitations 
may be most apparent in complex, decontextualized language tasks such as 
narrative production.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00920.x
PMCID: PMC3360585
PMID: 20590727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1609. Dev Sci. 2010 Jul;13(4):611-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00908.x.

Knowing about not remembering: developmental dissociations in lack-of-memory 
monitoring.

Ghetti S(1), Castelli P, Lyons KE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA. 
sghetti@ucdavis.edu

Children aged 7 and younger encounter great difficulty in assessing whether lack 
of memory for an event indicates that the event was not experienced. The present 
research investigated whether this difficulty results from a general inability 
to evaluate memory absence or from a specific inability to monitor one feature 
of memory absence that has been examined in previous studies, namely expected 
memorability. Seven-, 8- and 9-year-olds, and adults (N = 72) enacted, imagined 
and confabulated about bizarre and common actions. Two weeks later, participants 
were asked to recognize the actions that had been enacted. Even 7-year-olds 
monitored the relative familiarity of rejected distracters (i.e. reported higher 
confidence for the rejection of novel versus imagined and confabulated 
distracters). However, only older children and adults exhibited the ability to 
monitor expected memorability (e.g. reported higher confidence for the rejection 
of bizarre versus common distracters). These results suggest that young children 
exhibit specific, rather than general, deficits in monitoring memory absence, 
and provide an indication of the specific domains in which lack-of-memory 
monitoring improves during childhood.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00908.x
PMID: 20590725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1610. Dev Sci. 2010 Jul;13(4):599-610. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00913.x.

Social categories guide young children's preferences for novel objects.

Shutts K(1), Banaji MR, Spelke ES.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Harvard University, USA. kshutts@wisc.edu

To whom do children look when deciding on their own preferences? To address this 
question, 3-year-old children were asked to choose between objects or activities 
that were endorsed by unfamiliar people who differed in gender, race (White, 
Black), or age (child, adult). In Experiment 1, children demonstrated robust 
preferences for objects and activities endorsed by children of their own gender, 
but less consistent preferences for objects and activities endorsed by children 
of their own race. In Experiment 2, children selected objects and activities 
favored by people of their own gender and age. In neither study did most 
children acknowledge the influence of these social categories. These findings 
suggest that gender and age categories are encoded spontaneously and influence 
children's preferences and choices. For young children, gender and age may be 
more powerful guides to preferences than race.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00913.x
PMCID: PMC2898520
PMID: 20590724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1611. Dev Sci. 2010 Jul;13(4):588-98. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00910.x.

Brain activation during upright and inverted encoding of own- and other-age 
faces: ERP evidence for an own-age bias.

Melinder A(1), Gredebäck G, Westerlund A, Nelson CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Oslo, Norway. 
a.m.d.melinder@psykologi.uio.no

We investigated the neural processing underlying own-age versus other-age faces 
among 5-year-old children and adults, as well as the effect of orientation on 
face processing. Upright and inverted faces of 5-year-old children, adults, and 
elderly adults (> 75 years of age) were presented to participants while ERPs and 
eye tracking patterns were recorded concurrently. We found evidence for an 
own-age bias in children, as well as for predicted delayed latencies and larger 
amplitudes for inverted faces, which replicates earlier findings. Finally, we 
extend recent reports about an expert-sensitive component (P2) to other-race 
faces to account for similar effects in regard to other-age faces. We conclude 
that differences in neural activity are strongly related to the amount and 
quality of experience that participants have with faces of various ages. Effects 
of orientation are discussed in relation to the holistic hypothesis and recent 
data that compromise this view.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00910.x
PMCID: PMC2898522
PMID: 20590723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1612. Dev Sci. 2010 Jul;13(4):565-77. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00914.x.

Faces are special for newly hatched chicks: evidence for inborn domain-specific 
mechanisms underlying spontaneous preferences for face-like stimuli.

Rosa-Salva O(1), Regolin L, Vallortigara G.

Author information:
(1)Department of General Psychology, University of Padova, Italy. 
orsola.rosasalva@unipd.it

It is currently being debated whether human newborns' preference for faces is 
due to an unlearned, domain-specific and configural representation of the 
appearance of a face, or to general mechanisms, such as an up-down bias 
(favouring top-heavy stimuli, which have more elements in their upper part). 
Here we show that 2-day-old domestic chicks, visually naïve for the arrangement 
of inner facial features, spontaneously prefer face-like, schematic, stimuli. 
This preference is maintained when the up-down bias is controlled for 
(Experiment1) or when put in direct conflict with facedness (Experiment 4). In 
contrast, we found no evidence for the presence of an up-down bias in chicks 
(Experiment 2). Moreover, our results indicate that the eye region of stimuli is 
crucial in determining the expression of spontaneous preferences for faces 
(Experiments 3 and 4).

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00914.x
PMID: 20590721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1613. Dev Sci. 2010 Jul;13(4):F8-F14. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00983.x.

Rapid processing of letters, digits and symbols: what purely visual-attentional 
deficit in developmental dyslexia?

Ziegler JC(1), Pech-Georgel C, Dufau S, Grainger J.

Author information:
(1)Département de Psychologie, Aix-Marseille Université, France. 
Johannes.Ziegler@univ-provence.fr

Visual-attentional theories of dyslexia predict deficits for dyslexic children 
not only for the perception of letter strings but also for non-alphanumeric 
symbol strings. This prediction was tested in a two-alternative forced-choice 
paradigm with letters, digits, and symbols. Children with dyslexia showed 
significant deficits for letter and digit strings but not for symbol strings. 
This finding is difficult to explain for visual-attentional theories of dyslexia 
which postulate identical deficits for letters, digits and symbols. Moreover, 
dyslexics showed normal W-shaped serial position functions for letter and digit 
strings, which suggests that their deficit is not due to an abnormally small 
attentional window. Finally, the size of the deficit was identical for letters 
and digits, which suggests that poor letter perception is not just a consequence 
of the lack of reading. Together then, our results show that symbols that map 
onto phonological codes are impaired (i.e. letters and digits), whereas symbols 
that do not map onto phonological codes are not impaired. This dissociation 
suggests that impaired symbol-sound mapping rather than impaired 
visual-attentional processing is the key to understanding dyslexia.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00983.x
PMID: 20590718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1614. Dev Sci. 2010 May;13(3):533-544. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00909.x.

Development of aptitude at altitude.

Hogan AM(1), Virues-Ortega J(1), Botti AB(1), Bucks R(1), Holloway JW(1), 
Rose-Zerilli MJ(1), Palmer LJ(1), Webster RJ(1), Baldeweg T(1), Kirkham FJ(1).

Author information:
(1) UCL Institute of Child Health, London, UK CIBER in Neurodegenerative 
Diseases (CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain Child Health, Nutrition Unit, Prince Leopold 
Institute of Tropical Medicine, Belgium School of Psychology, University of 
Western Australia, Australia Divisions of Human Genetics and Infection, 
Inflammation & Repair, School of Medicine, University of Southampton, UK Centre 
for Genetic Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Western Australia, 
Australia School of Medicine, University of Southampton, UK.

Millions of people currently live at altitudes in excess of 2500 metres, where 
oxygen supply is limited, but very little is known about the development of 
brain and behavioural function under such hypoxic conditions. We describe the 
physiological, cognitive and behavioural profile of a large cohort of infants 
(6-12 months), children (6-10 years) and adolescents (13-16 years) who were born 
and are living at three altitude locations in Bolivia ( approximately 500 m, 
approximately 2500 m and approximately 3700 m). Level of haemoglobin oxygen 
saturation and end-tidal carbon dioxide were significantly lower in all age 
groups living above 2500 metres, confirming the presence of hypoxia and 
hypocapnia, but without any detectable detriment to health. Infant measures of 
neurodevelopment and behaviour yielded comparable results across altitude 
groups. Neuropsychological assessment in children and adolescent groups 
indicated a minor reduction in psychomotor speed with increasing altitude, with 
no effect of age. This may result from slowing of underlying brain activity in 
parallel with reduced cerebral metabolism and blood flow, evidenced here by 
reduced cerebral blood flow velocity, particularly in the basilar artery, in 
children and adolescents. The proportion of European, Native American and 
African genetic admixture was comparable across altitude groups, suggesting that 
adaptation to high altitude in these children occurred in response to chronic 
hypoxic exposure irrespective of ethnic origin. Thus, psychomotor slowing is 
proposed to be an adaptive rather than a deficient trait, perhaps enabling 
accuracy of mental activity in hypoxic conditions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00909.x
PMID: 20443973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1615. Dev Sci. 2010 May;13(3):508-520. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00897.x.

How is phonological processing related to individual differences in children's 
arithmetic skills?

De Smedt B(1), Taylor J(1), Archibald L(1), Ansari D(1).

Author information:
(1) Numerical Cognition Laboratory, University of Western Ontario, Canada 
 Centre for Parenting, Child Welfare & Disabilities, Katholieke Universiteit 
Leuven, Belgium  Language, Reading and Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory, 
University of Western Ontario, Canada.

While there is evidence for an association between the development of reading 
and arithmetic, the precise locus of this relationship remains to be determined. 
Findings from cognitive neuroscience research that point to shared neural 
correlates for phonological processing and arithmetic as well as recent 
behavioral evidence led to the present hypothesis that there exists a highly 
specific association between phonological awareness and single-digit arithmetic 
with relatively small problem sizes. The present study examined this association 
in 37 typically developing fourth and fifth grade children. Regression analyses 
revealed that phonological awareness was specifically and uniquely related to 
arithmetic problems with a small but not large problem size. Further analysis 
indicated that problems with a high probability of being solved by retrieval, 
but not those typically associated with procedural problem-solving strategies, 
are correlated with phonological awareness. The specific association between 
phonological awareness and arithmetic problems with a small problem size and 
those for which a retrieval strategy is most common was maintained even after 
controlling for general reading ability and phonological short-term memory. The 
present findings indicate that the quality of children's long-term phonological 
representations mediates individual differences in single-digit arithmetic, 
suggesting that more distinct long-term phonological representations are related 
to more efficient arithmetic fact retrieval.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00897.x
PMID: 20443971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1616. Dev Sci. 2010 May;13(3):499-507. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00903.x.

Neural markers of subordinate-level categorization in 6- to 7-month-old infants.

Quinn PC(1), Doran MM(1), Reiss JE(1), Hoffman JE(1).

Author information:
(1) Department of Psychology, University of Delaware, USA Department of 
Psychology, Wheaton College, USA.

Subordinate-level category-learning processes in infants were investigated with 
ERP and looking-time measures. ERPs were recorded while 6- to 7-month-olds were 
presented with Saint Bernard images during familiarization, followed by novel 
Saint Bernards interspersed with Beagles during test. In addition, infant 
looking times were measured during a paired-preference test (novel Saint Bernard 
vs. novel Beagle) conducted at the conclusion of ERP recording. Slow wave 
activity corresponded with learning a familiarized category at the subordinate 
and basic levels, whereas Negative central (Nc) and P400 components were linked 
with novel category preference. The results provide the first evidence 
identifying the neural markers of subordinate-level categorization observed in 
looking-time tasks conducted with infants. Moreover, when considered in 
conjunction with prior research investigating the neural markers of basic-level 
categorization in infants, the findings indicate that (1) slow wave and Nc 
components of infant ERP waveforms are general markers for processes of category 
learning on the one hand and novel category preference on the other, (2) novel 
category preference for a contrast category at the basic and subordinate levels 
have the Nc component in common, but novel category preference at the 
subordinate level is accompanied by an additional P400 component, a finding in 
keeping with the notion that subordinate-level categorization is governed by 
mechanisms supplementary to those underlying basic-level categorization, and (3) 
slow wave activity associated with subordinate-level learning followed that 
associated with basic-level learning by approximately 200 ms, a result in accord 
with a coarse-to-fine scheme for the emergence of category partitioning.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00903.x
PMID: 20443970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1617. Dev Sci. 2010 May;13(3):469-478. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00901.x.

Using innate visual biases to guide face learning in natural scenes: a 
computational investigation.

Balas B(1).

Author information:
(1)Developmental Medicine Center, Children's Hospital Boston, USA.

Newborn infants appear to possess an innate bias that guides preferential 
orienting to and tracking of human faces. There is, however, no clear agreement 
as to the underlying mechanism supporting such a preference. In particular, two 
competing theories (known as the 'structural' and 'sensory' hypotheses) 
conjecture fundamentally different biasing mechanisms to explain this behavior. 
The structural hypothesis suggests that a crude '3-dot' representation of 
face-specific geometry is responsible for the exhibited preference. By contrast, 
the sensory hypothesis suggests that face preference is the product of several 
generic visual preferences for qualities like dark/light vertical asymmetry, 
horizontal symmetry, and high contrast. To complement existing empirical 
results, the current study describes a computational investigation of how well 
both proposals actually support face detection in cluttered natural scenes. The 
results demonstrate that both models are capable of locating faces effectively, 
but that the model suggested by the 'sensory hypothesis' is more selective than 
the model suggested by the 'structural hypothesis'.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00901.x
PMID: 20443967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1618. Dev Sci. 2010 May;13(3):430-440. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00893.x.

Developmental profiles for multiple object tracking and spatial memory: 
typically developing preschoolers and people with Williams syndrome.

O'Hearn K(1), Hoffman JE(1), Landau B(1).

Author information:
(1) Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
USA Department of Psychology, University of Delaware, Newark, USA Department of 
Cognitive Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA.

The ability to track moving objects, a crucial skill for mature performance on 
everyday spatial tasks, has been hypothesized to require a specialized mechanism 
that may be available in infancy (i.e. indexes). Consistent with the idea of 
specialization, our previous work showed that object tracking was more impaired 
than a matched spatial memory task in individuals with Williams syndrome (WS), a 
genetic disorder characterized by severe visuo-spatial impairment. We now ask 
whether this unusual pattern of performance is a reflection of general 
immaturity or of true abnormality, possibly reflecting the atypical brain 
development in WS. To examine these two possibilities, we tested typically 
developing 3- and 4-year-olds and people with WS on multiple object tracking 
(MOT) and memory for static spatial location. The maximum number of objects that 
could be correctly tracked or remembered (estimated from the k-statistic) showed 
similar developmental profiles in typically developing 3- and 4-year-old 
children, but the WS profile differed from either age group. People with WS 
could track more objects than 3-year-olds, and the same number as 4-year-olds, 
but they could remember the locations of more static objects than both 3- and 
4-year-olds. Combining these data with those from our previous studies, we found 
that typically developing children show increases in the number of objects they 
can track or remember between the ages of 3 and 6, and these increases grow in 
parallel across the two tasks. In contrast, object tracking in older children 
and adults with WS remains at the level of 4-year-olds, whereas the ability to 
remember multiple locations of static objects develops further. As a whole, the 
evidence suggests that MOT and memory for static location develop in tandem 
typically, but not in WS. Atypical development of the parietal lobe in people 
with WS could play a causal role in the abnormal, uneven pattern of performance 
in WS. This interpretation is consistent with the idea that multiple object 
tracking engages different mechanisms from those involved in memory for static 
object location, and that the former can be particularly disrupted by atypical 
development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00893.x
PMCID: PMC2927133
PMID: 20443964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1619. Dev Sci. 2010 Mar;13(2):339-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00886.x.

Testing the limits of statistical learning for word segmentation.

Johnson EK(1), Tyler MD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, ON, Canada. 
elizabeth.johnson@utoronto.ca

Past research has demonstrated that infants can rapidly extract syllable 
distribution information from an artificial language and use this knowledge to 
infer likely word boundaries in speech. However, artificial languages are 
extremely simplified with respect to natural language. In this study, we ask 
whether infants' ability to track transitional probabilities between syllables 
in an artificial language can scale up to the challenge of natural language. We 
do so by testing both 5.5- and 8-month-olds' ability to segment an artificial 
language containing four words of uniform length (all CVCV) or four words of 
varying length (two CVCV, two CVCVCV). The transitional probability cues to word 
boundaries were held equal across the two languages. Both age groups segmented 
the language containing words of uniform length, demonstrating that even 
5.5-month-olds are extremely sensitive to the conditional probabilities in their 
environment. However, neither age group succeeded in segmenting the language 
containing words of varying length, despite the fact that the transitional 
probability cues defining word boundaries were equally strong in the two 
languages. We conclude that infants' statistical learning abilities may not be 
as robust as earlier studies have suggested.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00886.x
PMCID: PMC2819668
PMID: 20136930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1620. Dev Sci. 2010 Mar;13(2):265-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00851.x.

The contact principle and utilitarian moral judgments in young children.

Pellizzoni S(1), Siegal M, Surian L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Trieste, Italy.

In three experiments involving 207 preschoolers and 28 adults, we investigated 
the extent to which young children base moral judgments of actions aimed to 
protect others on utilitarian principles. When asked to judge the rightness of 
intervening to hurt one person in order to save five others, the large majority 
of children aged 3 to 5 years advocated intervention in contrast to another 
situation with the reverse cost/benefit ratio. This course of action was seen as 
acceptable by most children only when it did not require the agent to have 
physical contact with the victim and the victim's harm was intended to produce 
the greatest good for the greatest number. Overall, the children's responses 
were remarkably similar to those reported in adult studies. These findings 
document the extent to which some constraints on moral judgment are present in 
early human development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00851.x
PMID: 20136922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1621. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):244-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00882.x.

Better working memory for non-social targets in infant siblings of children with 
Autism Spectrum Disorder.

Noland JS(1), Steven Reznick J, Stone WL, Walden T, Sheridan EH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Human Development, Peabody, Box #552, 230 
Appleton Place, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37203-5701, USA. 
julia.noland@vanderbilt.edu

We compared working memory (WM) for the location of social versus non-social 
targets in infant siblings of children with Autism Spectrum Disorders (sibs-ASD, 
n = 25) and of typically developing children (sibs-TD, n = 30) at 6.5 and 9 
months of age. There was a significant interaction of risk group and target type 
on WM, in which the sibs-ASD had better WM for non-social targets as compared 
with controls. There was no group by stimulus interaction on two non-memory 
measures. The results suggest that the increased competency of sibs-ASD in WM 
(creating, updating and using transient representations) for non-social stimuli 
distinguishes them from sibs-TD by 9 months of age. This early emerging strength 
is discussed as a developmental pathway that may have implications for social 
attention and learning in children at risk for ASD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00882.x
PMCID: PMC2818009
PMID: 20121880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1622. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):188-200. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00869.x.

Reduced chromatic discrimination in children with autism spectrum disorders.

Franklin A(1), Sowden P, Notman L, Gonzalez-Dixon M, West D, Alexander I, 
Loveday S, White A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey GU2 5XH, 
UK. a.franklin@surrey.ac.uk

Atypical perception in Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) is well documented (Dakin 
& Frith, 2005). However, relatively little is known about colour perception in 
ASD. Less accurate performance on certain colour tasks has led some to argue 
that chromatic discrimination is reduced in ASD relative to typical development 
(Franklin, Sowden, Burley, Notman & Alder, 2008). The current investigation 
assessed chromatic discrimination in children with high-functioning autism (HFA) 
and typically developing (TD) children matched on age and non-verbal cognitive 
ability, using the Farnsworth-Munsell 100 hue test (Experiment 1) and a 
threshold discrimination task (Experiment 2). In Experiment 1, more errors on 
the chromatic discrimination task were made by the HFA than the TD group. 
Comparison with test norms revealed that performance for the HFA group was at a 
similar level to typically developing children around 3 years younger. In 
Experiment 2, chromatic thresholds were elevated for the HFA group relative to 
the TD group. For both experiments, reduced chromatic discrimination in ASD was 
due to a general reduction in chromatic sensitivity rather than a specific 
difficulty with either red-green or blue-yellow subsystems of colour vision. The 
absence of group differences on control tasks ruled out an explanation in terms 
of general task ability rather than chromatic sensitivity. Theories to account 
for the reduction in chromatic discrimination in HFA are discussed, and findings 
are related to cortical models of perceptual processing in ASD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00869.x
PMID: 20121875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1623. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):69-76. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00865.x.

Two-year-olds compute syntactic structure on-line.

Bernal S(1), Dehaene-Lambertz G, Millotte S, Christophe A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et Psycholinguistique, EHESS/CNRS/DEC-ENS, 
Paris, France.

Syntax allows human beings to build an infinite number of new sentences from a 
finite stock of words. Because toddlers typically utter only one or two words at 
a time, they have been thought to have no syntax. Using event-related potentials 
(ERPs), we demonstrated that 2-year-olds do compute syntactic structure when 
listening to spoken sentences. We observed an early left-lateralized brain 
response when an expected verb was incorrectly replaced by a noun (or vice 
versa). Thus, toddlers build on-line expectations as to the syntactic category 
of the next word in a sentence. In addition, the response topography was 
different for nouns and verbs, suggesting that different neural networks already 
underlie noun and verb processing in toddlers, as they do in adults.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00865.x
PMID: 20121864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1624. Dev Sci. 2010 Jan 1;13(1):46-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00852.x.

Prolonged institutional rearing is associated with atypically large amygdala 
volume and difficulties in emotion regulation.

Tottenham N(1), Hare TA, Quinn BT, McCarry TW, Nurse M, Gilhooly T, Millner A, 
Galvan A, Davidson MC, Eigsti IM, Thomas KM, Freed PJ, Booma ES, Gunnar MR, 
Altemus M, Aronson J, Casey BJ.

Author information:
(1)Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Medical College of 
Cornell University, USA. nimtottenham@ucla.edu

Early adversity, for example poor caregiving, can have profound effects on 
emotional development. Orphanage rearing, even in the best circumstances, lies 
outside of the bounds of a species-typical caregiving environment. The long-term 
effects of this early adversity on the neurobiological development associated 
with socio-emotional behaviors are not well understood. Seventy-eight children, 
who include those who have experienced orphanage care and a comparison group, 
were assessed. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was used to measure volumes of 
whole brain and limbic structures (e.g. amygdala, hippocampus). Emotion 
regulation was assessed with an emotional go-nogo paradigm, and anxiety and 
internalizing behaviors were assessed using the Screen for Child Anxiety Related 
Emotional Disorders, the Child Behavior Checklist, and a structured clinical 
interview. Late adoption was associated with larger corrected amygdala volumes, 
poorer emotion regulation, and increased anxiety. Although more than 50% of the 
children who experienced orphanage rearing met criteria for a psychiatric 
disorder, with a third having an anxiety disorder, the group differences 
observed in amygdala volume were not driven by the presence of an anxiety 
disorder. The findings are consistent with previous reports describing negative 
effects of prolonged orphanage care on emotional behavior and with animal models 
that show long-term changes in the amygdala and emotional behavior following 
early postnatal stress. These changes in limbic circuitry may underlie residual 
emotional and social problems experienced by children who have been 
internationally adopted.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00852.x
PMCID: PMC2817950
PMID: 20121862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1625. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):1083-96. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00855.x.

Why is visual search superior in autism spectrum disorder?

Joseph RM(1), Keehn B, Connolly C, Wolfe JM, Horowitz TS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Boston University School of Medicine, 
Boston, MA 02118, USA. rmjoseph@bu.edu

This study investigated the possibility that enhanced memory for rejected 
distractor locations underlies the superior visual search skills exhibited by 
individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). We compared the performance of 
21 children with ASD and 21 age- and IQ-matched typically developing (TD) 
children in a standard static search task and a dynamic search task, in which 
targets and distractors randomly changed locations every 500 ms, precluding the 
use of memory in search. Children with ASD exhibited overall faster reaction 
time (RT) relative to TD children, and showed no disruption in search efficiency 
in the dynamic condition, discounting the possibility that memory for rejected 
distractors augments their visual search abilities. Analyses of RT x set size 
functions showed no group differences in slopes but lower intercepts for the ASD 
group in both static and dynamic search, suggesting that the ASD advantage 
derived from non-search processes, such as an enhanced ability to discriminate 
between targets and distractors at the locus of attention. Eye-movement analyses 
revealed that the ASD and TD groups were similar in the number and spatial 
distribution of fixations across the search array, but that fixation duration 
was significantly shorter among children with ASD. Lower intercepts in static 
search were related to increased symptom severity in children with ASD. In 
summary, ASD search superiority did not derive from differences in the manner in 
which individuals with ASD deployed their attention while searching, but from 
anomalously enhanced perception of stimulus features, which was in turn 
positively associated with autism symptom severity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00855.x
PMID: 19840062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1626. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):946-55. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00839.x.

Asymmetrical cortical processing of radial expansion/contraction in infants and 
adults.

Shirai N(1), Birtles D, Wattam-Bell J, Yamaguchi MK, Kanazawa S, Atkinson J, 
Braddick O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Faculty of Humanities, Niigata University, Japan. 
shirai@human.niigata-u.ac.jp

We report asymmetrical cortical responses (steady-state visual evoked 
potentials) to radial expansion and contraction in human infants and adults. 
Forty-four infants (22 3-month-olds and 22 4-month-olds) and nine adults viewed 
dynamic dot patterns which cyclically (2.1 Hz) alternate between radial 
expansion (or contraction) and random directional motion. The first harmonic 
(F1) response in the steady-state VEP response must arise from mechanisms 
sensitive to the global radial motion structure. We compared F1 amplitudes 
between expansion-random and contraction-random motion alternations. F1 
amplitudes for contraction were significantly larger than those for expansion 
for the older infants and adults but not for the younger infants. These results 
suggest that the human cortical motion mechanisms have asymmetrical sensitivity 
for radial expansion vs. contraction, which develops at around 4 months of age. 
The relation between development of sensitivity to radial motion and cortical 
motion mechanisms is discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00839.x
PMID: 19840050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1627. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):920-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00842.x.

Enumeration of objects and substances in non-human primates: experiments with 
brown lemurs (Eulemur fulvus).

Mahajan N(1), Barnes JL, Blanco M, Santos LR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.

Retraction in
    Dev Sci. 2014 Jan;17(1):159.

Both human infants and adult non-human primates share the capacity to track 
small numbers of objects across time and occlusion. The question now facing 
developmental and comparative psychologists is whether similar mechanisms give 
rise to this capacity across the two populations. Here, we explore whether 
non-human primates' object tracking abilities are subject to the same 
constraints as those of human infants. In particular, we examine whether one 
primate species, the brown lemur (Eulemur fulvus), also fails to represent and 
enumerate objects when they behave non-rigidly or non-cohesively. We presented 
lemurs with a series of expectancy violation studies involving simple 1 + 1 
addition events in which we varied the entities to be enumerated. Like infants, 
lemurs successfully enumerated the two objects when those objects were rigid, 
cohesive individuals, but failed to enumerate similar-looking non-rigid piles of 
sand. In contrast to human infants, however, lemurs successfully enumerated 
non-cohesive objects that broke into multiple pieces. These results are 
discussed in light of recent theories about object processing in human infants 
and adults.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00842.x
PMID: 19840047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1628. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):914-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00835.x.

Language-specific stress perception by 9-month-old French and Spanish infants.

Skoruppa K(1), Pons F, Christophe A, Bosch L, Dupoux E, Sebastián-Gallés N, 
Limissuri RA, Peperkamp S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et Psycholinguistique, Ecole des Hautes 
Etudes en Sciences Sociales, Département d'Etudes Cognitives-Ecole Normale 
Supérieure, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris, France. 
Skoruppa@ens.fr

During the first year of life, infants begin to have difficulties perceiving 
non-native vowel and consonant contrasts, thus adapting their perception to the 
phonetic categories of the target language. In this paper, we examine the 
perception of a non-segmental feature, i.e. stress. Previous research with 
adults has shown that speakers of French (a language with fixed stress) have 
great difficulties in perceiving stress contrasts (Dupoux, Pallier, Sebastián & 
Mehler, 1997), whereas speakers of Spanish (a language with lexically 
contrastive stress) perceive these contrasts as accurately as segmental 
contrasts. We show that language-specific differences in the perception of 
stress likewise arise during the first year of life. Specifically, 9-month-old 
Spanish infants successfully distinguish between stress-initial and stress-final 
pseudo-words, while French infants of this age show no sign of discrimination. 
In a second experiment using multiple tokens of a single pseudo-word, French 
infants of the same age successfully discriminate between the two stress 
patterns, showing that they are able to perceive the acoustic correlates of 
stress. Their failure to discriminate stress patterns in the first experiment 
thus reflects an inability to process stress at an abstract, phonological level.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00835.x
PMID: 19840046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1629. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):874-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00829.x.

Developmental shift in the discrimination of vowel contrasts in bilingual 
infants: is the distributional account all there is to it?

Sebastián-Gallés N(1), Bosch L.

Author information:
(1)Parc Científic UB & Departament de Psicologia Bàsica, University of 
Barcelona, Spain. nuria.sebastian@upf.edu

A shift from language-general to language-specific sound discrimination 
abilities has been largely attested in different populations of infants during 
the second half of the first year of life; however, data are still scarce 
regarding bilingual populations. Previous research with 4-, 8- and 12-month-old 
Catalan-Spanish bilingual infants had offered evidence of a U-shaped pattern in 
their ability to discriminate a language-specific vowel contrast. This research 
explores monolingual and bilingual 4- and 8-month-olds' capacities to 
discriminate two common vowel contrasts: /o-u/ and /e-u/. All groups succeeded 
except 8-month-old bilinguals tested on the phonetically close /o-u/ contrast. 
Discrimination was not facilitated when talker and token variability were 
reduced. A U-shaped pattern was again found when data from an additional group 
of 12-month-olds were included. These results confirm bilinguals' specific 
developmental pattern of perceptual reorganization for acoustically close vowels 
and challenge an interpretation merely based on a distributional account.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00829.x
PMID: 19840043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1630. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):839-53. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00834.x.

Lifespan differences in cortical dynamics of auditory perception.

Müller V(1), Gruber W, Klimesch W, Lindenberger U.

Author information:
(1)Center for Lifespan Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, 
Berlin, Germany. vmueller@mpib-berlin.mpg.de

Using electroencephalographic recordings (EEG), we assessed differences in 
oscillatory cortical activity during auditory-oddball performance between 
children aged 9-13 years, younger adults, and older adults. From childhood to 
old age, phase synchronization increased within and between electrodes, whereas 
whole power and evoked power decreased. We conclude that the cortical dynamics 
of perceptual processing undergo substantial reorganization from childhood to 
old age, and discuss possible reasons for the inverse relation between age 
trends in phase synchronization and power, such as lifespan differences in 
neural background activity, or a lifespan shift from rate coding in children to 
temporal coding in adults.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00834.x
PMID: 19840040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1631. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):831-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00815.x.

Domestic dogs comprehend human communication with iconic signs.

Kaminski J(1), Tempelmann S, Call J, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Sub-Department of Animal Behaviour, University of Cambridge, Madingley, 
Cambridge, UK. kaminski@eva.mpg.de

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):838.

A key skill in early human development is the ability to comprehend 
communicative intentions as expressed in both nonlinguistic gestures and 
language. In the current studies, we confronted domestic dogs (some of whom knew 
many human 'words') with a task in which they had to infer the intended referent 
of a human's communicative act via iconic signs--specifically, replicas and 
photographs. Both trained and untrained dogs successfully used iconic replicas 
to fetch the desired item, with many doing so from the first trial. Dogs' 
ability to use photographs in this same situation was less consistent. Because 
simple matching to sample in experimental contexts typically takes hundreds of 
trials (and because similarity between iconic sign and target item did not 
predict success), we propose that dogs' skillful performance in the current task 
reflects important aspects of the comprehension of human communicative 
intentions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00815.x
PMID: 19840038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1632. Dev Sci. 2009 Nov;12(6):F16-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00916.x.

Differential development of selectivity for faces and bodies in the fusiform 
gyrus.

Peelen MV(1), Glaser B, Vuilleumier P, Eliez S.

Author information:
(1)Swiss Center for Affective Sciences, University of Geneva, Switzerland. 
mpeelen@princeton.edu

Viewing faces or bodies activates category-selective areas of visual cortex, 
including the fusiform face area (FFA), fusiform body area (FBA), and 
extrastriate body area (EBA). Here, using fMRI, we investigate the development 
of these areas, focusing on the right FFA and FBA. Despite the overlap of 
functionally defined FFA and FBA (54%-75% overlap), we found that these regions 
developed along different trajectories. With age (7-32 years old), the FFA 
gradually increased in size and selectivity, and was significantly larger and 
more face-selective in adults than children. By contrast, the size and 
selectivity of the FBA did not correlate with age, and were equivalent in 
children and adults. Whereas in adults the FFA and FBA were comparable in size, 
in children the FBA was on average 70% larger than the FFA. These findings 
suggest that, in children, the fusiform gyrus is predominantly selective for 
bodies, with commensurate face-selective responses apparent later in 
development. Moreover, differences in the development of the FFA and FBA 
indicate that overlapping functional brain areas, supported by the same 
anatomical structure, can develop along different trajectories.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00916.x
PMID: 19840035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1633. Dev Sci. 2009 Sep;12(5):746-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00813.x.

Continuity in social cognition from infancy to childhood.

Yamaguchi M(1), Kuhlmeier VA, Wynn K, vanMarle K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, USA.

Research examining the development of social cognition has largely been divided 
into two areas: infant perception of intentional agents, and preschoolers' 
understanding of others' mental states and beliefs (theory of mind). Many 
researchers have suggested that there is continuity in social cognitive 
development such that the abilities observed in infancy are related to later 
preschool ability, yet little empirical evidence exists for this claim. Here, we 
present preliminary evidence that capacities specific to the social domain 
contribute to performance in social cognition tasks both during infancy and in 
early childhood. Specifically, looking time patterns in an infant social 
cognition task correlated with preschool theory of mind; however, no such 
relationship was found for infants in a nonsocial cognition task.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00813.x
PMID: 19702767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1634. Dev Sci. 2009 Sep;12(5):688-98. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00802.x.

Do great apes use emotional expressions to infer desires?

Buttelmann D(1), Call J, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental & Comparative Psychology, Max Planck Institute 
for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany. buttelmann@eva.mpg.de

Although apes understand others' goals and perceptions, little is known about 
their understanding of others' emotional expressions. We conducted three studies 
following the general paradigm of Repacholi and colleagues (1997, 1998). In 
Study 1, a human reacted emotionally to the hidden contents of two boxes, after 
which the ape was allowed to choose one of the boxes. Apes distinguished between 
two of the expressed emotions (happiness and disgust) by choosing appropriately. 
In Studies 2 and 3, a human reacted either positively or negatively to the 
hidden contents of two containers; then the ape saw him eating something. When 
given a choice, apes correctly chose the container to which the human had 
reacted negatively, based on the inference that the human had just eaten the 
food to which he had reacted positively - and so the other container still had 
food left in it. These findings suggest that great apes understand both the 
directedness and the valence of some human emotional expressions, and can use 
this understanding to infer desires.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00802.x
PMID: 19702761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1635. Dev Sci. 2009 Sep;12(5):681-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00800.x.

Preserved visual representations despite change blindness in infants.

Wang SH(1), Mitroff SR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Santa Cruz, California 
95064, USA. suhua@ucsc.edu

Combining theoretical hypotheses of infant cognition and adult perception, we 
present evidence that infants can maintain visual representations despite their 
failure to detect a change. Infants under 12 months typically fail to notice a 
change to an object's height in a covering event. The present experiments 
demonstrated that 11-month-old infants can nevertheless maintain a viable 
representation of both the pre- and post-change heights despite their 'change 
blindness'. These results suggest that infants, like adults, can simultaneously 
maintain multiple representations, even if they do not optimally use them.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00800.x
PMCID: PMC2732666
PMID: 19702760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1636. Dev Sci. 2009 Jul;12(4):670-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00805.x.

Infant cognition: going full factorial with pupil dilation.

Jackson I(1), Sirois S.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychological Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester, 
UK.

The violation-of-expectation (VOE) paradigm and related methods are the main 
tools used to study high-level cognition in preverbal infants. Infants' 
differential looking to conceptually implausible/impossible events has been used 
as an index of early cognitive competence in many areas, including object 
knowledge, physics, language, and number. However, an event's plausibility is 
commonly confounded with its perceptual novelty or familiarity, leading to a 
variety of interpretations for looking time data (Bogartz, Shinskey & Speaker, 
1997). This illustrative study demonstrates the value of factorial designs, in 
which perceptual (novelty-familiarity) and conceptual (possible-impossible) 
variables are independently and jointly explored. It also introduces pupil 
dilation as a viable and complementary dependent measure to study infant 
cognition. We show that pupil data can assist in the interpretation of otherwise 
equivocal looking time data. The discussion focuses on methodological 
considerations in infancy research.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00805.x
PMID: 19635092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1637. Dev Sci. 2009 Jul;12(4):602-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00812.x.

Understanding of speaker certainty and false-belief reasoning: a comparison of 
Japanese and German preschoolers.

Matsui T(1), Rakoczy H, Miura Y, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Primate Research Institute, Kyoto University, Inuyama, Aichi 484-8506, Japan. 
matsui@pri.kyoto-u.ac.jp

It has been repeatedly shown that when asked to identify a protagonist's false 
belief on the basis of his false statement, English-speaking 3-year-olds dismiss 
the statement and fail to attribute to him a false belief. In the present 
studies, we tested 3-year-old Japanese children in a similar task, using false 
statements accompanied by grammaticalized particles of speaker (un)certainty, as 
in everyday Japanese utterances. The Japanese children were directly compared 
with same-aged German children, whose native language does not have 
grammaticalized epistemic concepts. Japanese children profited from the explicit 
statement of the protagonist's false belief when it was marked with the attitude 
of certainty in a way that German children did not - presumably because Japanese 
but not German children must process such marking routinely in their daily 
discourse. These results are discussed in the broader context of linguistic and 
theory of mind development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00812.x
PMID: 19635086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1638. Dev Sci. 2009 Jul;12(4):568-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00808.x.

Electrophysiological responses to auditory novelty in temperamentally different 
9-month-old infants.

Marshall PJ(1), Reeb BC, Fox NA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Temple University, 1701 N. 13th St, Philadelphia, 
PA 19122, USA. peter.marshall@temple.edu

Behavioral reactivity to novel stimuli in the first half-year of life has been 
identified as a key aspect of early temperament and a significant precursor of 
approach and withdrawal tendencies to novelty in later infancy and early 
childhood. The current study examines the neural signatures of reactivity to 
novel auditory stimuli in 9-month-old infants in relation to prior temperamental 
reactivity. On the basis of the assessment of behavioral reactivity scores at 4 
months of age, infants were classified into groups of high negatively reactive 
and high positively reactive infants. Along with an unselected control group, 
these groups of temperamentally different infants were given a three-stimulus 
auditory oddball task at 9 months of age which employed frequent standard and 
infrequent deviant tones as well as a set of complex novel sounds. In comparison 
to high positively reactive and control infants, high negatively reactive 
infants displayed increased amplitude of a positive slow wave in the ERP 
response to deviant tones compared to standard tones. In contrast, high 
positively reactive infants showed a larger novelty P3 to the complex novel 
sounds. Results are discussed in terms of optimal levels of novelty for 
temperamentally different infants.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00808.x
PMCID: PMC2718772
PMID: 19635084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1639. Dev Sci. 2009 Jul;12(4):557-67. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00790.x.

Brainstem transcription of speech is disrupted in children with autism spectrum 
disorders.

Russo N(1), Nicol T, Trommer B, Zecker S, Kraus N.

Author information:
(1)The Auditory Neuroscience Laboratory, Department of Communication Sciences, 
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA.

Language impairment is a hallmark of autism spectrum disorders (ASD). The origin 
of the deficit is poorly understood although deficiencies in auditory processing 
have been detected in both perception and cortical encoding of speech sounds. 
Little is known about the processing and transcription of speech sounds at 
earlier (brainstem) levels or about how background noise may impact this 
transcription process. Unlike cortical encoding of sounds, brainstem 
representation preserves stimulus features with a degree of fidelity that 
enables a direct link between acoustic components of the speech syllable (e.g. 
onsets) to specific aspects of neural encoding (e.g. waves V and A). We measured 
brainstem responses to the syllable /da/, in quiet and background noise, in 
children with and without ASD. Children with ASD exhibited deficits in both the 
neural synchrony (timing) and phase locking (frequency encoding) of speech 
sounds, despite normal click-evoked brainstem responses. They also exhibited 
reduced magnitude and fidelity of speech-evoked responses and inordinate 
degradation of responses by background noise in comparison to typically 
developing controls. Neural synchrony in noise was significantly related to 
measures of core and receptive language ability. These data support the idea 
that abnormalities in the brainstem processing of speech contribute to the 
language impairment in ASD. Because it is both passively elicited and malleable, 
the speech-evoked brainstem response may serve as a clinical tool to assess 
auditory processing as well as the effects of auditory training in the ASD 
population.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00790.x
PMCID: PMC2718770
PMID: 19635083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1640. Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):484-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00798.x.

Synaesthesia: learned or lost?

Cohen Kadosh R(1), Henik A, Walsh V.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience & Department of Psychology, University 
College London, UK. r.cohenkadosh@ucl.ac.uk

The question why synaesthesia, an atypical binding within or between modalities, 
occurs is both enduring and important. Two explanations have been provided: (1) 
a congenital explanation: we are all born as synaesthetes but most of us 
subsequently lose the experience due to brain development; (2) a learning 
explanation: synaesthesia is related to some learning process during childhood. 
Three recent studies provide conflicting support for these explanations. Two 
studies supported the idea that synaesthesia is learned by showing that the 
frequency of everyday language implicitly modulates the synaesthetic experience. 
Another study argued that synaesthesia reflects basic, innate magnitude 
representations. In this paper we reassess these points of view, and show that 
it is possible for both to be valid. These findings are integrated into an 
interactive specialization account of development in order to explain the 
neuronal mechanism underlying synaesthesia.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00798.x
PMID: 19371373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1641. Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):474-83. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00803.x.

Increasing convergence between imagined and executed movement across 
development: evidence for the emergence of movement representations.

Caeyenberghs K(1), Wilson PH, van Roon D, Swinnen SP, Smits-Engelsman BC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Kinesiology, K.U.Leuven, Heverlee, Belgium. 
Karen.Caeyenberghs@faber.kuleuven.be

Motor imagery (MI) has become a principal focus of interest in studies on brain 
and behavior. However, changes in MI across development have received virtually 
no attention so far. In the present study, children (N = 112, 6 to 16 years old) 
performed a new, computerized Virtual Radial Fitts Task (VRFT) to determine 
their MI ability as well as the age-related confluence between performance in 
executed and imagined movement conditions. Participants aimed at five targets, 
which were positioned along radial axes from a central target circle. The 
targets differed in width (2.5, 5, 10, 20 or 40 mm), resulting in an index of 
difficulty (ID) that varied from 6.9 to 2.9 bits. Performance was indexed by the 
linear relationship between ID and Movement Time (MT). The findings showed that 
executed task performance was slower than imagined performance. Moreover, 
conformance to Fitts' Law during executed movement performance was obtained from 
a very young age. Most importantly, correlations between imagined and executed 
movements were low in the young participants but gradually increased across age. 
These age-related changes in MI are hypothesized to reflect the children's 
emerging ability to represent internal models for prospective actions, 
consistent with the gradual unfolding of feedforward control processes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00803.x
PMID: 19371372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1642. Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):464-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00782.x.

The race that precedes coactivation: development of multisensory facilitation in 
children.

Barutchu A(1), Crewther DP, Crewther SG.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychological Science, La Trobe University, Bundoora, Australia.

RATIONALE: The facilitating effect of multisensory integration on motor 
responses in adults is much larger than predicted by race-models and is in 
accordance with the idea of coactivation. However, the development of 
multisensory facilitation of endogenously driven motor processes and its 
relationship to the development of complex cognitive skills in school-age 
children is largely unexplored.
METHOD: Twenty adults and 95 children where allocated into six age groups: 6, 7, 
8, 9, 10-11 and adults. Participants' motor reaction times (MRTs) and accuracy 
in response to the detection of auditory, visual and audiovisual stimuli were 
recorded. Children's reading accuracy and nonverbal IQ were also assessed.
RESULTS: In general, MRTs of children were significantly slower with greater 
variability than those of adults. Although the average level of multisensory 
facilitation was similar for all age groups, mean cumulative density functions 
(CDFs) showed that multisensory facilitation in 6 and 10-11-year-olds is within 
the predictive limits of race-models. Where coactivation was seen in the CDF of 
individual children it was not as strong or as consistent as that in adults. The 
degree of multisensory facilitation did not correlate with age, reading accuracy 
or IQ.
CONCLUSION: The average level of multisensory facilitation to endogenously 
driven motor responses does not change gradually with age nor is it related to 
intelligence or reading accuracy. In general, multisensory integration remains 
immature until 10-11 years of age and lies within the predicted confines of 
race-models.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00782.x
PMID: 19371371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1643. Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):426-37. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00792.x.

Choosing your informant: weighing familiarity and recent accuracy.

Corriveau K(1), Harris PL.

Author information:
(1)Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. 
kcorriv@fas.harvard.edu

In two experiments, children aged 3, 4 and 5 years (N = 61) were given 
conflicting information about the names and functions of novel objects by two 
informants, one a familiar teacher, the other an unfamiliar teacher. On pre-test 
trials, all three age groups invested more trust in the familiar teacher. They 
preferred to ask for information and to endorse the information that she 
supplied. In a subsequent phase, children watched as the two teachers differed 
in the accuracy with which they named a set of familiar objects. Half the 
children saw the familiar teacher name the objects accurately and the unfamiliar 
teacher name them inaccurately. The remaining half saw the reverse arrangement. 
In post-test trials, the selective trust initially displayed by 3-year-olds was 
minimally affected by this intervening experience of differential accuracy. By 
contrast, the selective trust of 4- and 5-year-olds was affected. If the 
familiar teacher had been the more accurate, selective trust in her was 
intensified. If, on the other hand, the familiar teacher had been the less 
accurate, it was undermined, particularly among 5-year-olds. Thus, by 4 years of 
age, children trust familiar informants but moderate that trust depending on the 
informants' recent history of accuracy or inaccuracy.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00792.x
PMID: 19371367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1644. Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):379-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00823.x.

Comparing infants' preference for correlated audiovisual speech with 
signal-level computational models.

Hollich G(1), Prince CG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 
47907, USA. ghollich@purdue.edu

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):407-9.
    Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):409-11.

How much of infant behaviour can be accounted for by signal-level analyses of 
stimuli? The current paper directly compares the moment-by-moment behaviour of 
8-month-old infants in an audiovisual preferential looking task with that of 
several computational models that use the same video stimuli as presented to the 
infants. One type of model utilizes only signal-level properties of visual 
motion whereas the other adds audiovisual integration (either through 
correlation or instantaneous addition of audio and visual signals). Together 
these models account for a significant portion of the variance in infant 
looking.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00823.x
PMID: 19371360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1645. Dev Sci. 2009 Apr;12(3):F1-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00820.x.

Priming third-party ostracism increases affiliative imitation in children.

Over H(1), Carpenter M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Comparative Psychology, Max Planck Institute 
for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany. OverH@cardiff.ac.uk

Human beings are intensely social creatures and, as such, devote significant 
time and energy to creating and maintaining affiliative bonds with group 
members. Nevertheless, social relations sometimes collapse and individuals 
experience exclusion from the group. Fortunately for adults, they are able to 
use behavioral strategies such as mimicry to reduce their social exclusion. Here 
we test whether children, too, increase their imitation following an experience 
of ostracism. Given humans' profound need to belong, we predicted that the mere 
hint of social exclusion--even third-party social exclusion--would be sufficient 
to increase affiliative imitation in 5-year-olds. As predicted, children primed 
with videos in which one shape was ostracized by a group of other shapes 
subsequently imitated the actions of a model more closely than children in a 
control condition. These findings highlight just how sensitive humans are to 
social exclusion and demonstrate that children, like adults, modify their social 
behavior in response to ostracism.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00820.x
PMID: 19371357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1646. Dev Sci. 2009 Mar;12(2):350-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00783.x.

Programmed to learn? The ontogeny of mirror neurons.

Del Giudice M(1), Manera V, Keysers C.

Author information:
(1)Center for Cognitive Science, Department of Psychology, University of Turin, 
Torino, Italy. marco.delgiudice@unito.it

Mirror neurons are increasingly recognized as a crucial substrate for many 
developmental processes, including imitation and social learning. Although there 
has been considerable progress in describing their function and localization in 
the primate and adult human brain, we still know little about their ontogeny. 
The idea that mirror neurons result from Hebbian learning while the child 
observes/hears his/her own actions has received remarkable empirical support in 
recent years. Here we add a new element to this proposal, by suggesting that the 
infant's perceptual-motor system is optimized to provide the brain with the 
correct input for Hebbian learning, thus facilitating the association between 
the perception of actions and their corresponding motor programs. We review 
evidence that infants (1) have a marked visual preference for hands, (2) show 
cyclic movement patterns with a frequency that could be in the optimal range for 
enhanced Hebbian learning, and (3) show synchronized theta EEG (also known to 
favour synaptic Hebbian learning) in mirror cortical areas during 
self-observation of grasping. These conditions, taken together, would allow 
mirror neurons for manual actions to develop quickly and reliably through 
experiential canalization. Our hypothesis provides a plausible pathway for the 
emergence of mirror neurons that integrates learning with genetic 
pre-programming, suggesting new avenues for research on the link between 
synaptic processes and behaviour in ontogeny.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00783.x
PMID: 19143807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1647. Dev Sci. 2009 Mar;12(2):339-49. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00786.x.

Speaker variability augments phonological processing in early word learning.

Rost GC(1), McMurray B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA 52242, USA. gwyneth-rost@uiowa.edu

Infants in the early stages of word learning have difficulty learning lexical 
neighbors (i.e. word pairs that differ by a single phoneme), despite their 
ability to discriminate the same contrast in a purely auditory task. While prior 
work has focused on top-down explanations for this failure (e.g. task demands, 
lexical competition), none has examined if bottom-up acoustic-phonetic factors 
play a role. We hypothesized that lexical neighbor learning could be improved by 
incorporating greater acoustic variability in the words being learned, as this 
may buttress still-developing phonetic categories, and help infants identify the 
relevant contrastive dimension. Infants were exposed to pictures accompanied by 
labels spoken by either a single or multiple speakers. At test, infants in the 
single-speaker condition failed to recognize the difference between the two 
words, while infants who heard multiple speakers discriminated between them.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00786.x
PMCID: PMC3011987
PMID: 19143806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1648. Dev Sci. 2009 Mar;12(2):297-304. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00766.x.

Embodied infant attention.

Robertson SS(1), Johnson SL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Development, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. 
ssr4@cornell.edu

Does real time coupling between mental and physical activity early in 
development have functional significance? To address this question, we examined 
the habituation of visual attention and the subsequent response to change in two 
groups of 3-month-olds with different patterns of movement-attention coupling. 
In suppressors, the typical decrease in body movement at the onset of looks 
persists into the looks. In rebounders, the initial decrease is more transient 
and movement quickly returns above baseline. Suppressors and rebounders did not 
differ on measures of looking during habituation, but when the stimulus changed 
rebounders looked more than suppressors. When it did not change, they looked 
less. In addition, during habituation rebounders spent more time looking away 
from the stimulus. Rapid motor reactivation soon after gaze locks onto a target, 
characteristic of rebounders, may influence visual foraging and the response to 
change by keeping attention near a threshold of engagement.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00766.x
PMID: 19143802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1649. Dev Sci. 2009 Mar;12(2):236-48. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00765.x.

Holistic processing for faces and cars in preschool-aged children and adults: 
evidence from the composite effect.

Cassia VM(1), Picozzi M, Kuefner D, Bricolo E, Turati C.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Psicologia, Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca, Italy. 
viola.macchicassia@unimib.it

The current study compared the development of holistic processing for faces and 
non-face visual objects by testing for the composite effect for faces and 
frontal images of cars in 3- to 5-year-old children and adults in a series of 
four experiments using a two-alternative forced-choice recognition task. Results 
showed that a composite effect for faces was present as early as 3 1/2 years, 
and none of the age groups tested showed signs of a composite effect for cars. 
These findings provide the first demonstration that holistic processing is 
already selective for faces in early childhood, and confirm existing evidence 
that sensitivity to holistic information in faces does not increase from 4 years 
to adulthood.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00765.x
PMID: 19143797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1650. Dev Sci. 2009 Mar;12(2):209-19. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00757.x.

Electrophysiological indices of memory for temporal order in early childhood: 
implications for the development of recollection.

Riggins T(1), Miller NC, Bauer PJ, Georgieff MK, Nelson CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, 
USA. riggins@umd.edu

The ability to recall contextual details associated with an event begins to 
develop in the first year of life, yet adult levels of recall are not reached 
until early adolescence. Dual-process models of memory suggest that the distinct 
retrieval process that supports the recall of such contextual information is 
recollection. In the present investigation, we used both behavioral and 
electrophysiological measures to assess the development of memory for contextual 
details, as indexed by memory for temporal order, in early childhood. Results 
revealed age-related improvements in memory for temporal order despite similar 
levels of memory for the individual items themselves. Furthermore, this pattern 
of recall was associated with specific components in the electrophysiological 
response. Consistent with electrophysiological research in adults, distributed, 
positive-going activity late in the waveform was associated with increases in 
recall of contextual details and the development of recollective processes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00757.x
PMCID: PMC2771175
PMID: 19143795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1651. Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):201-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00753.x.

The narrow fellow in the grass: human infants associate snakes and fear.

Deloache JS(1), Lobue V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904, 
USA. eloache@virginia.edu

Why are snakes such a common target of fear? One current view is that snake fear 
is one of several innate fears that emerge spontaneously. Another is that humans 
have an evolved predisposition to learn to fear snakes. In the first study 
reported here, 9- to 10-month-old infants showed no differential spontaneous 
reaction to films of snakes versus other animals. In the second study, 7- to 
18-month-old infants associated snakes with fear: As predicted, they looked 
longer at films of snakes while listening to a frightened human voice than while 
listening to a happy voice. In the third study, infants did not look 
differentially to still photos of snakes and other animals, indicating that 
movement is crucial to infants' association of snakes with fear. These results 
offer support for the view that humans have a natural tendency to selectively 
associate snakes with fear.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00753.x
PMID: 19120429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1652. Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):88-95. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00749.x.

To generalize or not to generalize: spatial categories are influenced by 
physical attributes and language.

Hespos SJ(1), Piccin TB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA. 
hespos@northwestern.edu

The current work explored the conditions under which infants generalize spatial 
relationships from one event to another. English-learning 5-month-olds 
habituated to a tight- or loose-fit covering event dishabituated to a change in 
fit during a containment test event, but infants habituated to a visually 
similar occlusion event did not. Thus, infants' responses appeared to be driven 
by the physical nature of the fit rather than visual similarity. This response 
pattern was replicated with Korean-speaking adults, but English-speaking adults 
showed no sensitivity to change in fit for either event. These findings suggest 
that language development links linguistic forms to universal, pre-existing 
representations of meaning, and that linguistic experience can shape sensitivity 
to distinctions that are marked in one's native language.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00749.x
PMID: 19120416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1653. Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):81-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00735.x.

Co-speech gesture as input in verb learning.

Goodrich W(1), Hudson Kam CL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94709, USA. 
wgoodrich@berkeley.edu

People gesture a great deal when speaking, and research has shown that listeners 
can interpret the information contained in gesture. The current research 
examines whether learners can also use co-speech gesture to inform language 
learning. Specifically, we examine whether listeners can use information 
contained in an iconic gesture to assign meaning to a novel verb form. Two 
experiments demonstrate that adults and 2-, 3-, and 4-year-old children can 
infer the meaning of novel intransitive verbs from gestures when no other source 
of information is present. The findings support the idea that gesture might be a 
source of input available to language learners.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00735.x
PMID: 19120415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1654. Dev Sci. 2009 Jan;12(1):55-66. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00743.x.

Neurocognitive development of relational reasoning.

Crone EA(1), Wendelken C, van Leijenhorst L, Honomichl RD, Christoff K, Bunge 
SA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Psychology, Leiden University, The Netherlands.

Relational reasoning is an essential component of fluid intelligence, and is 
known to have a protracted developmental trajectory. To date, little is known 
about the neural changes that underlie improvements in reasoning ability over 
development. In this event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) 
study, children aged 8-12 and adults aged 18-25 performed a relational reasoning 
task adapted from Raven's Progressive Matrices. The task included three levels 
of relational reasoning demands: REL-0, REL-1, and REL-2. Children exhibited 
disproportionately lower accuracy than adults on trials that required 
integration of two relations (REL-2). Like adults, children engaged lateral 
prefrontal cortex (PFC) and parietal cortex during task performance; however, 
they exhibited different time courses and activation profiles, providing insight 
into their approach to the problems. As in prior studies, adults exhibited 
increased rostrolateral PFC (RLPFC) activation when relational integration was 
required (REL-2 > REL-1, REL-0). Children also engaged RLPFC most strongly for 
REL-2 problems at early stages of processing, but this differential activation 
relative to REL-1 trials was not sustained throughout the trial. These results 
suggest that the children recruited RLPFC while processing relations, but failed 
to use it to integrate across two relations. Relational integration is critical 
for solving a variety of problems, and for appreciating analogies; the current 
findings suggest that developmental improvements in this function rely on 
changes in the profile of engagement of RLPFC, as well as dorsolateral PFC and 
parietal cortex.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00743.x
PMCID: PMC2614685
PMID: 19120413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1655. Dev Sci. 2008 Nov;11(6):882-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00744.x.

Sex differences in past tense overregularization.

Kidd E(1), Lum JA.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychological Sciences, The University of Manchester, UK. 
jarrad.lum@deakin.edu.au

Hartshorne and Ullman (2006) presented naturalistic language data from 25 
children (15 boys, 10 girls) and showed that girls produced more past tense 
overregularization errors than did boys. In particular, girls were more likely 
to overregularize irregular verbs whose stems share phonological similarities 
with regular verbs. It was argued that the result supported the 
Declarative/Procedural model of language, a neuropsychological analogue of the 
dual-route approach to language. In the current study we present experimental 
data that are inconsistent with these naturalistic data. Eighty children (40 
males, 40 females) aged 5;0-6;9 completed a past tense elicitation task, a test 
of declarative memory, and a test of non-verbal intelligence. The results 
revealed no sex differences on any of the measures. Instead, the best predictors 
of overregularization rates were item-level features of the test verbs. We 
discuss the results within the context of dual versus single route debate on 
past tense acquisition.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00744.x
PMID: 19046157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1656. Dev Sci. 2008 Nov;11(6):869-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00751.x.

Effects of auditory input in individuation tasks.

Robinson CW(1), Sloutsky VM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Cognitive Science, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, 
USA.

Under many conditions auditory input interferes with visual processing, 
especially early in development. These interference effects are often more 
pronounced when the auditory input is unfamiliar than when the auditory input is 
familiar (e.g. human speech, pre-familiarized sounds, etc.). The current study 
extends this research by examining how auditory input affects 8- and 
14-month-olds' performance on individuation tasks. The results of the current 
study indicate that both unfamiliar sounds and words interfered with infants' 
performance on an individuation task, with cross-modal interference effects 
being numerically stronger for unfamiliar sounds. The effects of auditory input 
on a variety of lexical tasks are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00751.x
PMID: 19046156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1657. Dev Sci. 2008 Nov;11(6):841-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00732.x.

Recognition of iconicity doesn't come for free.

Namy LL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. 
Lnamy@emory.edu

Iconicity--resemblance between a symbol and its referent--has long been presumed 
to facilitate symbolic insight and symbol use in infancy. These two experiments 
test children's ability to recognize iconic gestures at ages 14 through 26 
months. The results indicate a clear ability to recognize how a gesture 
resembles its referent by 26 months, but little evidence of recognition of 
iconicity at the onset of symbolic development. These findings imply that 
iconicity is not available as an aid at the onset of symbolic development but 
rather that the ability to apprehend the relation between a symbol and its 
referent develops over the course of the second year.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00732.x
PMID: 19046152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1658. Dev Sci. 2008 Nov;11(6):F31-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00768.x.

Does input influence uptake? Links between maternal talk, processing speed and 
vocabulary size in Spanish-learning children.

Hurtado N(1), Marchman VA, Fernald A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. 
nhurtado@stanford.edu

It is well established that variation in caregivers' speech is associated with 
language outcomes, yet little is known about the learning principles that 
mediate these effects. This longitudinal study (n = 27) explores whether 
Spanish-learning children's early experiences with language predict efficiency 
in real-time comprehension and vocabulary learning. Measures of mothers' speech 
at 18 months were examined in relation to children's speech processing 
efficiency and reported vocabulary at 18 and 24 months. Children of mothers who 
provided more input at 18 months knew more words and were faster in word 
recognition at 24 months. Moreover, multiple regression analyses indicated that 
the influences of caregiver speech on speed of word recognition and vocabulary 
were largely overlapping. This study provides the first evidence that input 
shapes children's lexical processing efficiency and that vocabulary growth and 
increasing facility in spoken word comprehension work together to support the 
uptake of the information that rich input affords the young language learner.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00768.x
PMCID: PMC2898277
PMID: 19046145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1659. Dev Sci. 2008 Sep;11(5):793-801. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00688.x.

Environmental stimulation, parental nurturance and cognitive development in 
humans.

Farah MJ(1), Betancourt L, Shera DM, Savage JH, Giannetta JM, Brodsky NL, Malmud 
EK, Hurt H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. mfarah@psych.upenn.edu

The effects of environmental stimulation and parental nurturance on brain 
development have been studied extensively in animals. Much less is known about 
the relations between childhood experience and cognitive development in humans. 
Using a longitudinally collected data set with ecologically valid in-home 
measures of childhood experience and later in-laboratory behavioral measures of 
cognitive ability, we were able to test hypotheses concerning the effects of 
environmental stimulation and parental nurturance. A double dissociation was 
found: On the one hand, there was a selective relation between parental 
nurturance and memory development, consistent with the animal literature on 
maternal buffering of stress hormone effects on hippocampal development. On the 
other hand, there was a selective relation between environmental stimulation and 
language development. The relevance of these findings to socioeconomic gradients 
in cognitive ability is discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00688.x
PMID: 18810850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1660. Dev Sci. 2008 Sep;11(5):F25-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00709.x.

A hidden cost of happiness in children.

Schnall S(1), Jaswal VK, Rowe C.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Plymouth, UK. 
simone.schnall@plymouth.ac.uk

Happiness is generally considered an emotion with only beneficial effects, 
particularly in childhood. However, there are some situations where the style of 
information processing triggered by happiness could be a liability. In 
particular, happiness seems to motivate a top-down processing style, which could 
impair performance when attention to detail is required. Indeed, in Experiment 
1, 10- to 11-year-old children (N = 30) induced to feel a happy mood were slower 
to locate a simple shape embedded in a complex figure than those induced to feel 
a sad mood. In Experiment 2, 6- to 7-year-old children (N = 61) induced to feel 
a happy mood found fewer embedded shapes than those induced to feel a sad or 
neutral mood. Happiness may have unintended and possibly undesirable cognitive 
consequences, even in childhood.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00709.x
PMID: 18810848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1661. Dev Sci. 2008 Sep;11(5):637-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00711.x.

Small and large number processing in infants and toddlers with Williams 
syndrome.

Van Herwegen J(1), Ansari D, Xu F, Karmiloff-Smith A.

Author information:
(1)Neurocognitive Development Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, UK.

Previous studies have suggested that typically developing 6-month-old infants 
are able to discriminate between small and large numerosities. However, 
discrimination between small numerosities in young infants is only possible when 
variables continuous with number (e.g. area or circumference) are confounded. In 
contrast, large number discrimination is successful even when variables 
continuous with number are systematically controlled for. These findings suggest 
the existence of different systems underlying small and large number processing 
in infancy. How do these develop in atypical syndromes? Williams syndrome (WS) 
is a rare neurocognitive developmental disorder in which numerical cognition has 
been found to be impaired in older children and adults. Do impairments of number 
processing have their origins in infancy? Here this question is investigated by 
testing the small and large number discrimination abilities of infants and 
toddlers with WS. While infants with WS were able to discriminate between 2 and 
3 elements when total area was confounded with numerosity, the same infants did 
not discriminate between 8 and 16 elements, when number was not confounded with 
continuous variables. These findings suggest that a system for tracking the 
features of small numbers of object (object-file representation) may be 
functional in WS, while large number discrimination is impaired from an early 
age onwards. Finally, we argue that individual differences in large number 
processing in infancy are more likely than small number processing to be 
predictive of later development of numerical cognition.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00711.x
PMID: 18801117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1662. Dev Sci. 2008 Jul;11(4):575-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00703.x.

Young German children's early syntactic competence: a preferential looking 
study.

Dittmar M(1), Abbot-Smith K, Lieven E, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Germany, and Institute of 
Psychology, University of Zurich, Switzerland. m.dittmar@psychologie.uzh.ch

Using a preferential looking methodology with novel verbs, Gertner, Fisher and 
Eisengart (2006) found that 21-month-old English children seemed to understand 
the syntactic marking of transitive word order in an abstract, verb-general way. 
In the current study we tested whether young German children of this same age 
have this same understanding. Following Gertner et al. (2006), one group of 
German children was tested only after they had received a training/practice 
phase containing transitive sentences with familiar verbs and the exact same 
nouns as those used at test. A second group was tested after a training/practice 
phase consisting only of familiar verbs, without the nouns used at test. Only 
the group of children with the training on full transitive sentences was 
successful in the test. These findings suggest that for children this young to 
succeed in this test of syntactic understanding, they must first have some kind 
of relevant linguistic experience immediately prior to testing--which raises the 
question of the nature of children's linguistic representations at this early 
point in development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00703.x
PMID: 18576965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1663. Dev Sci. 2008 Jul;11(4):563-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00702.x.

Effect of partial occlusion on newborns' face preference and recognition.

Gava L(1), Valenza E, Turati C, de Schonen S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Social Psychology, University of Padua, 
Italy. lucia.gava@unipd.it

Many studies have shown that newborns prefer (e.g. Goren, Sarty & Wu, 1975; 
Valenza, Simion, Macchi Cassia & Umiltà, 1996) and recognize (e.g. Bushnell, Say 
& Mullin, 1989; Pascalis & de Schonen, 1994) faces. However, it is not known 
whether, at birth, faces are still preferred and recognized when some of their 
parts are not visible because hindered by other configurations, that is when 
faces are partly occluded. Also, it is not known whether newborns' preference 
for an upright over an inverted face and newborns' face recognition are 
differentially affected depending on the salience of the occluded face features. 
Seventy-seven newborns (mean age of 43.5 hrs) were tested using the preferential 
looking (Experiment 1) and the habituation techniques (Experiment 2). Results 
demonstrated that newborns prefer and recognize occluded faces even if some 
portions of them are not available, at least when the hindered features are not 
salient. On the contrary, these abilities are affected by obscuring high 
salience facial features (i.e. eyes). However, while in the case of face 
detection, eyes occlusion completely prevented newborns' face detection, in the 
case of face recognition an analogous stimulus manipulation heavily impaired, 
but did not totally preclude, newborns' recognition performance. The data 
collected improve our comprehension of newborns' way of processing and encoding 
information to detect and recognize faces.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00702.x
PMID: 18576964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1664. Dev Sci. 2008 Jul;11(4):474-86. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00693.x.

Vision for perception and vision for action: normal and unusual development.

Dilks DD(1), Hoffman JE, Landau B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Science, Johns Hopkins University, USA. dilks@mit.edu

Evidence suggests that visual processing is divided into the dorsal ('how') and 
ventral ('what') streams. We examined the normal development of these streams 
and their breakdown under neurological deficit by comparing performance of 
normally developing children and Williams syndrome individuals on two tasks: a 
visually guided action ('how') task, in which participants posted a card into an 
oriented slot, and a perception ('what') task, in which they matched a card to 
the slot's orientation. Results showed that all groups performed worse on the 
action task than the perception task, but the disparity was more pronounced in 
WS individuals and in normal 3-4-year-olds than in older children. These 
findings suggest that the 'how' system may be relatively slow to develop and 
more vulnerable to breakdown than the 'what' system.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00693.x
PMID: 18576955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1665. Dev Sci. 2008 Jul;11(4):454-66. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00691.x.

Acquisition of mental state language in Spanish children: a longitudinal study 
of the relationship between the production of mental verbs and linguistic 
development.

Pascual B(1), Aguado G, Sotillo M, Masdeu JC.

Author information:
(1)Neuroimaging Laboratory, Neuroscience Division, Centre for Applied Medical 
Research (CIMA), University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. bpasmel@unav.es

The development of language indicating the emergence of thinking about the 
thoughts of self and others has been scarcely studied in Spanish-speaking 
children. For this reason, we studied the development of mental state language 
and various indicators of language development in 25 Spanish-speaking children 
assessed at 3, 3 1/2, 4, 4 1/2, and 5 years of age. We coded and categorized the 
40,250 utterances children produced during the five time points, 1202 (3.01%) of 
which had mental terms. In this sample, mental state language in Spanish 
children developed with a similar timeline and patterns as described in 
English-speaking children. However, several findings were novel for studies of 
mental state language. The general indexes of syntactic development did not 
correlate with the production of mental terms. The Index of Lexical Diversity 
was associated with the frequency of references to verbs of desire. The results 
of regression analyses suggest that not only the development of subordinate 
sentences with complement is associated with genuine mental references to 
desires and beliefs, but the development of lexical skills as well.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00691.x
PMID: 18576953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1666. Dev Sci. 2008 May;11(3):414-26. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00686.x.

Why size counts: children's spatial reorientation in large and small enclosures.

Learmonth AE(1), Newcombe NS, Sheridan N, Jones M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, William Patterson University, USA. 
learmontha@mville.edu

When mobile organisms are spatially disoriented, for instance by rapid 
repetitive movement, they must re-establish orientation. Past research has shown 
that the geometry of enclosing spaces is consistently used for reorientation by 
a wide variety of species, but that non-geometric features are not always used. 
Based on these findings, some investigators have postulated a species-universal 
'geometric module' that is transcended by the acquisition of spatial language at 
6 years. This conclusion has been challenged, however, by findings that children 
as young as 18 months actually do use features to reorient in larger enclosures 
than those used in the original experiments. The reason for the room size effect 
is explored here in five experiments. Collectively, the data on age at which 
features are first used point to the importance of both restriction of movement 
in the small space and the fact that features are closer in the small space. In 
addition, success is seen at younger ages when the target object is adjacent to 
the feature. These results favor an adaptive combination model of spatial 
reorientation over a 'module-plus-language' view.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00686.x
PMID: 18466375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1667. Dev Sci. 2008 May;11(3):407-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00685.x.

The effect of functional morphemes on word segmentation in preverbal infants.

Shi R(1), Lepage M.

Author information:
(1)Département de psychologie, Université du Québec à Montréal, Canada. 
shi.rushen@uqam.ca

This study examines the role of functional morphemes in the earliest stage of 
lexical development. Recent research showed that prelinguistic infants can 
perceive functional morphemes. We inquire whether infants use frequent functors 
to segment potential word forms. French-learning 8-month-olds were familiarized 
to two utterance types: a novel noun following a functor, and another novel noun 
following a prosodically matched nonsense functor. After familiarization, 
infants' segmentation of the two nouns was assessed in a test phase presenting 
the nouns in isolation. Infants in Experiment 1 showed evidence of using both 
frequent functors des and mes (as opposed to the nonsense functor kes) to 
segment the nouns, suggesting also that they had specific representations of the 
functors. The infrequent functor vos in Experiment 2 did not facilitate 
segmentation. Frequency is thus a crucial factor. Our findings demonstrate that 
frequent functors can bootstrap infants into early lexical learning. 
Furthermore, the effect of functors for initial word segmentation is likely 
universal.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00685.x
PMID: 18466374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1668. Dev Sci. 2008 May;11(3):390-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00683.x.

Preschool children's ability to visually represent relations.

Koerber S(1), Sodian B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Munich, Germany. 
koerber@edupsy.uni-muenchen.de

The developmental origins of mapping temporal relations onto space was 
investigated in N = 122 3- to 5-year-old children and adults. Spontaneous 
production and comprehension were investigated. Production was investigated in 
two conditions: an iconic condition (three-dimensional objects depicting the 
events or objects to be represented) and an abstract condition (plain discs). 
Consistent with findings by Tversky, Kugelmass and Winter (1991), 5-year-olds 
performed on an adult-like level. Developmental progress was observed between 
the ages of 3 and 4 years, with comprehension preceding production. Consistent 
with DeLoache's findings (2000), 4-year-olds' performance was better in abstract 
than in iconic conditions, indicating that dual representational demands may 
have affected task performance in the iconic condition. In sum, abilities to map 
temporal relations onto spatial relations appear to develop spontaneously, even 
before children have experience with conventional notational systems.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00683.x
PMID: 18466372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1669. Dev Sci. 2008 May;11(3):F9-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00671.x.

Speed of word recognition and vocabulary knowledge in infancy predict cognitive 
and language outcomes in later childhood.

Marchman VA(1), Fernald A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, CA 94305, USA. 
marchman@stanford.edu

The nature of predictive relations between early language and later cognitive 
function is a fundamental question in research on human cognition. In a 
longitudinal study assessing speed of language processing in infancy, Fernald, 
Perfors and Marchman (2006) found that reaction time at 25 months was strongly 
related to lexical and grammatical development over the second year. In this 
follow-up study, children originally tested as infants were assessed at 8 years 
on standardized tests of language, cognition, and working memory. Speed of 
spoken word recognition and vocabulary size at 25 months each accounted for 
unique variance in linguistic and cognitive skills at 8 years, effects that were 
attributable to strong relations between both infancy measures and working 
memory. These findings suggest that processing speed and early language skills 
are fundamental to intellectual functioning, and that language development is 
guided by learning and representational principles shared across cognitive and 
linguistic domains.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00671.x
PMCID: PMC2905590
PMID: 18466367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1670. Dev Sci. 2008 Mar;11(2):299-305. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00676.x.

Children's working understanding of the knowledge gained from seeing and 
feeling.

Robinson EJ(1), Haigh SN, Pendle JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Warwick University, Coventry, UK. 
e.j.robinson@warwick.ac.uk

In three experiments (N = 48 3- to 4-year olds; 100 3- to 5-year olds; 54 
4-year-olds), children who could see or feel a target toy, recognized when they 
had sufficient information to answer 'Which one is it?' and when they needed 
additional access. They were weaker at taking the informative modality of access 
when the choice was between seeing more of a partially visible toy and feeling 
it; at doing so when the target was completely hidden; and at reporting seeing 
or feeling as their source of knowledge of the target's identity having 
experienced both. Working understanding of the knowledge gained from seeing and 
feeling (identifying the target efficiently) was not necessarily in advance of 
explicit understanding (reporting the informative source).

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00676.x
PMID: 18333983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1671. Dev Sci. 2008 Mar;11(2):253-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00655.x.

An empirical validation of a dynamic systems model of interaction: do children 
of different sociometric statuses differ in their dyadic play?

Steenbeek H(1), van Geert P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Groningen, The Netherlands. 
h.w.steenbeek@rug.nl

Studying short-term dynamic processes and change mechanisms in interaction 
yields important knowledge that contributes to understanding long-term social 
development of children. In order to get a grip on this short-term dynamics of 
interaction processes, the authors made a dynamic systems model of dyadic 
interaction of children during one play session. The control parameters of the 
model relate to children's goal-directedness, concerns, emotional appraisals, 
social power, and social competence. Three groups of dyads of different 
sociometric statuses are represented by specific control parameter values. The 
model's order parameters consist of children's emotional expressions and other- 
versus self-directed actions. This article describes the empirical validation of 
the model and the methods needed for such validation. It focuses on the model's 
predictions of averages and distributions of the major variables, of the 
occurrence of attractors and power law distributions, and on the model's 
sensitivity. Overall, the model fits the empirical data well. In the discussion, 
we reflect on the developmental and methodological implications for explaining 
social interaction on the short-term as well as on the long-term time scale. In 
addition, implications for intervention and assessment are presented, in 
particular relating to the problem of rejection.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00655.x
PMID: 18333981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1672. Dev Sci. 2008 Mar;11(2):F1-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00670.x.

Young children's spontaneous use of geometry in maps.

Shusterman A(1), Ah Lee S, Spelke ES.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Wesleyan University, Middletown, CT 06459, USA. 
ashusterman@wesleyan.edu

Two experiments tested whether 4-year-old children extract and use geometric 
information in simple maps without task instruction or feedback. Children saw 
maps depicting an arrangement of three containers and were asked to place an 
object into a container designated on the map. In Experiment 1, one of the three 
locations on the map and the array was distinct and therefore served as a 
landmark; in Experiment 2, only angle, distance and sense information specified 
the target container. Children in both experiments used information for distance 
and angle, but not sense, showing signature error patterns found in adults. 
Children thus show early, spontaneously developing abilities to detect geometric 
correspondences between three-dimensional layouts and two-dimensional maps, and 
they use these correspondences to guide navigation. These findings begin to 
chart the nature and limits of the use of core geometry in a uniquely human, 
symbolic task.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00670.x
PMCID: PMC3572713
PMID: 18333971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1673. Dev Sci. 2003 Nov 1;6(5):557-567. doi: 10.1111/1467-7687.00312.

Testing the abstractness of children's linguistic representations: lexical and 
structural priming of syntactic constructions in young children.

Savage C(1), Lieven E, Theakston A, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Manchester University, UK.

The current studies used a priming methodology to assess the abstractness of 
children's early syntactic constructions. In the main study, 3-, 4- and 
6-year-old children were asked to describe a prime picture by repeating either 
an active or a passive sentence, and then they were left to their own devices to 
describe a target picture. For half the children at each age, the prime 
sentences they repeated had high lexical overlap with the sentence they were 
likely to produce for the target, whereas for the other half there was very low 
lexical overlap between prime and target. The main result was that 6-year-old 
children showed both lexical and structural priming for both the active 
transitive and passive constructions, whereas 3- and 4-year-old children showed 
lexical priming only. This pattern of results would seem to indicate that 
6-year-old children have relatively abstract representations of these 
constructions, whereas 3- and 4-year-old children have as an integral part of 
their representations certain specific lexical items, especially pronouns and 
some grammatical morphemes. In a second study it was found that children did not 
need to repeat the prime out loud in order to be primed - suggesting that the 
priming effect observed concerns not just peripheral production mechanisms but 
underlying linguistic representations common to comprehension and production. 
These results support the view that young children develop abstract linguistic 
representations gradually during the preschool years.

DOI: 10.1111/1467-7687.00312
PMCID: PMC2231515
PMID: 18259588


1674. Dev Sci. 2008 Jan;11(1):171-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00654.x.

Phonological awareness in young Chinese children.

Shu H(1), Peng H, McBride-Chang C.

Author information:
(1)State Key Lab of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal 
University, PR China.

Two studies explored the nature of phonological awareness (PA) in Chinese. In 
Study 1, involving 146 children, awareness of phoneme onset did not differ from 
chance levels at ages 3-5 years in preschool but increased to 70% correct in 
first grade, when children first received phonological coding (Pinyin) 
instruction. Similarly, tone awareness was at better than chance levels from 
second year kindergarten (age 4), but increased strongly and significantly in 
first grade to 74% accuracy. In contrast, syllable and rime awareness increased 
gradually and steadily across ages 3-6 years. Patterns suggest different 
influences of age and literacy instruction for different PA levels. In Study 2, 
involving 202 preschoolers, variance in Chinese character recognition was best 
explained by tasks of syllable awareness, tone awareness, and speeded naming. 
Findings underscore the unique importance of both tone and syllable for early 
character acquisition in Chinese children.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00654.x
PMID: 18171377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1675. Dev Sci. 2008 Jan;11(1):76-83. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00647.x.

Preference for attractive faces in human infants extends beyond conspecifics.

Quinn PC(1), Kelly DJ, Lee K, Pascalis O, Slater AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Delaware, USA.

Human infants, just a few days of age, are known to prefer attractive human 
faces. We examined whether this preference is human-specific. Three- to 
4-month-olds preferred attractive over unattractive domestic and wild cat 
(tiger) faces (Experiments 1 and 3). The preference was not observed when the 
faces were inverted, suggesting that it did not arise from low-level image 
differences (Experiments 2 and 3). In addition, the spontaneous preference for 
attractive tiger faces influenced performance in a recognition memory task 
involving attractive versus unattractive tiger face pairings (Experiment 4). The 
findings suggest that infant preference for attractive faces reflects the 
activity of general processing mechanisms rather than a specific adaptation to 
mate choice.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00647.x
PMCID: PMC2566458
PMID: 18171370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1676. Dev Sci. 2008 Jan;11(1):33-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00657.x.

Young Humeans: the role of emotions in children's evaluation of moral reasoning 
abilities.

Danovitch JH(1), Keil FC.

Author information:
(1)Child Study Center, Yale University School of Medicine, USA. 
Judith.Danovitch@yale.edu

Three experiments investigated whether children in grades K, 2, and 4 (n = 144) 
view emotional comprehension as important in solving moral dilemmas. The 
experiments asked whether a human or an artificially intelligent machine would 
be best at solving different types of problems, ranging from moral and emotional 
to nonmoral and pragmatic. In Experiment 1, children in all age groups indicated 
that a human would be superior to a computer not only at comprehending emotions, 
but also at solving moral dilemmas. In Experiment 2, older children also 
indicated that a human could solve moral dilemmas better than a 'robot' with 
human-like perceptual and physical abilities. Experiment 3 further demonstrated 
that these effects were not solely due to a bias towards humans. Thus, children 
as young as age 5 view emotional understanding as an important element for 
moral, but not for nonmoral, reasoning, suggesting that the basis for Humean 
intuitions emerges early in life.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00657.x
PMCID: PMC2657809
PMID: 18171364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1677. Dev Sci. 2008 Jan;11(1):10-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00643.x.

What are you looking at? Infants' neural processing of an adult's 
object-directed eye gaze.

Hoehl S(1), Reid V, Mooney J, Striano T.

Author information:
(1)Neurocognition and Development Group, Center for Advanced Studies, University 
of Leipzig and Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, 
Leipzig, Germany.

Previous research suggests that by 4 months of age infants use the eye gaze of 
adults to guide their attention and facilitate processing of environmental 
information. Here we address the question of how infants process the relation 
between another person and an external object. We applied an ERP paradigm to 
investigate the neural processes underlying the perception of the direction of 
an adult's eye gaze in 4-month-old infants. Infants showed differential 
processing of an adult's eye gaze, which was directed at a simultaneously 
presented object compared to non-object-directed eye gaze. This distinction was 
evident in two ERP components: The Negative component, reflecting attentional 
processes, and the positive slow wave, which is involved in memory encoding. The 
implications of these findings for the development of joint attention and 
related social cognitive functions are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00643.x
PMID: 18171361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1678. Dev Sci. 2007 Nov;10(6):874-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00639.x.

Development of action monitoring through adolescence into adulthood: ERP and 
source localization.

Ladouceur CD(1), Dahl RE, Carter CS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. ladouceurcd@upmc.edu

In this study we examined the development of three action monitoring 
event-related potentials (ERPs) - the error-related negativity (ERN/Ne), error 
positivity (P(E)) and the N2 - and estimated their neural sources. These ERPs 
were recorded during a flanker task in the following groups: early adolescents 
(mean age = 12 years), late adolescents (mean age = 16 years), and adults (mean 
age = 29 years). The amplitudes of the ERN/Ne and N2 were greater in the adult 
and late adolescent groups than in the early adolescent group. Both of these 
components had neural sources in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). Although 
P(E) was present across groups, P(E) amplitude was greater in the late 
adolescent group compared to the adult group and also had neural sources in the 
ACC. ERN/Ne amplitude was related to post-error slowing across age groups; it 
was related to task performance only in the adult group. These findings are 
discussed in light of the role of the maturation of the ACC in the development 
of action monitoring processes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00639.x
PMID: 17973802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1679. Dev Sci. 2007 Nov;10(6):836-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00624.x.

The influence of action perception on object recognition: a developmental study.

Mounoud P(1), Duscherer K, Moy G, Perraudin S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Université de Genève, Geneva, Switzerland. 
pierre.mounoud@pse.unige.ch

Two experiments explored the existence and the development of relations between 
action representations and object representations. A priming paradigm was used 
in which participants viewed an action pantomime followed by the picture of a 
tool, the tool being either associated or unassociated with the preceding 
action. Overall, we observed that the perception of an action pantomime can 
facilitate the recognition of a corresponding tool. Experiment 1 was based on a 
naming task and was conducted with 9- to 12-year-old children and a group of 
young adults. While substantial priming effects were obtained for all age 
groups, they were especially important for the youngest participants. Smaller 
priming effects were obtained in Experiment 2, using a categorization task and 
conducted on 5- to 11-year-old children and young adults, but again the results 
suggest that these action priming effects diminish with increasing age. 
Implications of these results for the organization and development of conceptual 
knowledge are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00624.x
PMID: 17973800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1680. Dev Sci. 2007 Nov;10(6):814-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00621.x.

Decision-making in healthy children, adolescents and adults explained by the use 
of increasingly complex proportional reasoning rules.

Huizenga HM(1), Crone EA, Jansen BJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. h.m.huizenga@uva.nl

In the standard Iowa Gambling Task (IGT), participants have to choose repeatedly 
from four options. Each option is characterized by a constant gain, and by the 
frequency and amount of a probabilistic loss. Crone and van der Molen (2004) 
reported that school-aged children and even adolescents show marked deficits in 
IGT performance. In this study, we have re-analyzed the data with a multivariate 
normal mixture analysis to show that these developmental changes can be 
explained by a shift from unidimensional to multidimensional proportional 
reasoning (Siegler, 1981; Jansen & van der Maas, 2002). More specifically, the 
results show a gradual shift with increasing age from (a) guessing with a slight 
tendency to consider frequency of loss to (b) focusing on frequency of loss, to 
(c) considering both frequency and amount of probabilistic loss. In the latter 
case, participants only considered options with low-frequency loss and then 
chose the option with the lowest amount of loss. Performance improved in a 
reversed task, in which punishment was placed up front and gain was delivered 
unexpectedly. In this reversed task, young children are guessing with already a 
slight tendency to consider both the frequency and amount of gain; this strategy 
becomes more pronounced with age. We argue that these findings have important 
implications for the interpretation of IGT performance, as well as for methods 
to analyze this performance.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00621.x
PMID: 17973798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1681. Dev Sci. 2007 Nov;10(6):770-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00635.x.

Temporal discrimination increases in precision over development and parallels 
the development of numerosity discrimination.

Brannon EM(1), Suanda S, Libertus K.

Author information:
(1)Center for Cognitive Neuroscience and Department of Psychology and 
Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA. brannon@duke.edu

Time perception is important for many aspects of human behavior, and a large 
literature documents that adults represent intervals and that their ability to 
discriminate temporal intervals is ratio dependent. Here we replicate a recent 
study by vanMarle and Wynn (2006) that used the visual habituation paradigm and 
demonstrated that temporal discrimination in 6-month-old infants is also ratio 
dependent. We further demonstrate that between 6 and 10 months of age temporal 
discrimination increases in precision such that by 10 months of age infants 
succeed at discriminating a 2:3 ratio, a ratio that 6-month-old infants were 
unable to discriminate. We discuss the potential implications of the fact that 
temporal discrimination follows the same developmental progression that has been 
previously observed for number discrimination in infancy (Lipton & Spelke, 
2003).

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00635.x
PMCID: PMC2918408
PMID: 17973794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1682. Dev Sci. 2007 Nov;10(6):727-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00622.x.

Nonspecific verbal cues alleviate forgetting by young children.

Morgan K(1), Hayne H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand. 
kmorgan@psy.otago.ac.nz

Verbal reminders play a pervasive role in memory retrieval by human adults. In 
fact, relatively nonspecific verbal information (e.g. 'Remember the last time we 
ate at that restaurant?') will often cue vivid recollections of a past event 
even when presented outside the original encoding context. Although research has 
shown that memory retrieval by young children can be initiated by physical cues 
and by highly specific verbal cues, the effect of less specific verbal cues is 
not known. Using a Visual Recognition Memory (VRM) procedure, we examined the 
effect of nonspecific verbal cues on memory retrieval by 4-year-old children. 
Our findings showed that nonspecific verbal cues were as effective as highly 
specific nonverbal cues in facilitating memory retrieval after a 2-week delay. 
We conclude that, at least by 4 years of age, children are able to use 
nonspecific verbal reminders to cue memory retrieval, and that the VRM paradigm 
may be particularly valuable in examining the age at which this initially 
occurs.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00622.x
PMID: 17973788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1683. Dev Sci. 2007 Sep;10(5):641-53. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00605.x.

Twenty-two-month-olds discriminate fluent from disfluent adult-directed speech.

Soderstrom M(1), Morgan JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive & Linguistic Sciences, Brown University, Providence, 
RI 02912, USA. melsod@brown.edu

Deviation of real speech from grammatical ideals due to disfluency and other 
speech errors presents potentially serious problems for the language learner. 
While infants may initially benefit from attending primarily or solely to 
infant-directed speech, which contains few grammatical errors, older infants may 
listen more to adult-directed speech. In a first experiment, Post-verbal infants 
preferred fluent speech to disfluent speech, while Pre-verbal infants showed no 
preference. In a second experiment, Post-verbal infants discriminated disfluent 
and fluent speech even when lexical information was removed, showing that they 
make use of prosodic properties of the speech stream to detect disfluency. 
Because disfluencies are highly correlated with grammatical errors, this 
sensitivity provides infants with a means of filtering ungrammaticality from 
their input.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00605.x
PMID: 17683348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1684. Dev Sci. 2007 Sep;10(5):613-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00616.x.

Conditions for young infants' failure to perceive trajectory continuity.

Bremner JG(1), Johnson SP, Slater A, Mason U, Cheshire A, Spring J.

Author information:
(1)Psychology Department, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK. 
j.g.bremner@lancaster.ac.uk

When viewing an event in which an object moves behind an occluder on part of its 
trajectory, 4-month-old infants perceive the trajectory as continuous only when 
time or distance out of sight is short. Little is known, however, about the 
conditions under which young infants perceive trajectories to be discontinuous. 
In the present studies we focus first on infants' perception of trajectories 
that change during a period of occlusion. Four-month-olds perceive discontinuity 
in trajectories that change in height or orientation while behind an occluder, 
and this is true even when a change in direction could be due to an invisible 
bouncing collision with a surface. Further experiments reveal that infants do 
not perceive diagonal linear trajectories as continuous across an occlusion 
unless the occluding and revealing edges are orthogonal to the path of movement. 
Implications for theories of perceptual and cognitive development are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00616.x
PMID: 17683346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1685. Dev Sci. 2007 Sep;10(5):559-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00611.x.

Use it or lose it: examining preschoolers' difficulty in maintaining and 
executing a goal.

Marcovitch S(1), Boseovski JJ, Knapp RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, 
Greensboro, NC 27402, USA. s_marcov@uncg.edu

Individuals with low working memory capacity (e.g. preschoolers) are more prone 
to goal neglect, or a failure to execute a goal even though it is understood. We 
examined the role of goal neglect in performance on the Dimensional Change Card 
Sort by including 'redundant' cards that could be sorted without attending to 
the rules, as well as the traditional 'conflict' cards that encouraged awareness 
of the rules. In Experiment 1, 4- and 5-year-old children were administered two 
card sorts that differed on the proportion of redundant cards presented (20% vs. 
80%). Children neglected the goal more often when faced with a preponderance of 
redundant cards, suggesting that consistent attention to the rules leads to goal 
maintenance. In Experiment 2, results were replicated even when the post-switch 
rules were repeated on every trial. Implications for the development of working 
memory are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00611.x
PMID: 17683342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1686. Dev Sci. 2007 Sep;10(5):530-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00606.x.

The attribution of attention: 9-month-olds' interpretation of gaze as 
goal-directed action.

Johnson SC(1), Ok SJ, Luo Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. 
scj@psych.stanford.edu

The current study distinguishes between attributions of goal-directed perception 
(i.e. attention) and non-goal-directed perception to examine 9-month-olds' 
interpretation of others' head and eye turns. In a looking time task, 
9-month-olds encoded the relationship between an actor's head and eye turns and 
a target object if the head and eye turns were embedded in a sequence of 
multiple, variable actions with equifinal outcomes, but not otherwise. This 
evidence supports the claim that infants of this age may attribute perception, 
at least goal-directed perception, to others and undermines arguments that 
gaze-following at this age consists only of uninterpreted reflexes. The evidence 
also suggests alternative interpretations of the typical errors infants make in 
standard gaze-following procedures. Implications for infants' understanding of 
perception and attention in both human and non-human agents are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00606.x
PMID: 17683339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1687. Dev Sci. 2007 Jul;10(4):492-501. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00602.x.

The role of kinetic information in newborns' perception of illusory contours.

Valenza E(1), Bulf H.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Psicologia dello Sviluppo e della Socializzazione, Università 
di Padova, via Venezia 8, 35131 Padua, Italy. eloisa.valenza@unipd.it

Previous research, in which static figures were used, showed that the ability to 
perceive illusory contours emerges around 7 months of age. However, recently, 
evidence has suggested that 2-3-month-old infants are able to perceive illusory 
contours when motion information is available (Johnson & Mason, 2002; Otsuka & 
Yamaguchi, 2003). The present study was aimed at investigating whether even 
newborns might perceive kinetic illusory contours when a motion easily detected 
by the immature newborn's visual system (i.e. stroboscopic motion) is used. In 
Experiment 1, using a preference looking technique, newborns' perception of 
kinetic illusory contours was explored using a Kanizsa figure in a static and in 
a kinetic display. The results showed that newborns manifest a preference for 
the illusory contours only in the kinetic, but not in the static, condition. In 
Experiment 2, using an habituation technique, newborns were habituated to a 
moving shape that was matched with the background in terms of 
random-texture-surface; thus the recovery of the shape was possible relying only 
on kinetic information. The results showed that infants manifested a novelty 
preference when presented with luminance-defined familiar and novel shapes. 
Altogether these findings provide evidence that motion enhances (Experiment 1) 
and sometimes is sufficient (Experiment 2) to induce newborns' perception of 
illusory contours.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00602.x
PMID: 17552938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1688. Dev Sci. 2007 Jul;10(4):464-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00600.x.

Socioeconomic gradients predict individual differences in neurocognitive 
abilities.

Noble KG(1), McCandliss BD, Farah MJ.

Author information:
(1)University of Pennsylvania Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, PA, USA. 
kimnoble2007@gmail.com

Socioeconomic status (SES) is associated with childhood cognitive achievement. 
In previous research we found that this association shows neural specificity; 
specifically we found that groups of low and middle SES children differed 
disproportionately in perisylvian/language and prefrontal/executive abilities 
relative to other neurocognitive abilities. Here we address several new 
questions: To what extent does this disparity between groups reflect a gradient 
of SES-related individual differences in neurocognitive development, as opposed 
to a more categorical difference? What other neurocognitive systems differ 
across individuals as a function of SES? Does linguistic ability mediate SES 
differences in other systems? And how do specific prefrontal/executive 
subsystems vary with SES? One hundred and fifty healthy, socioeconomically 
diverse first-graders were administered tasks tapping language, visuospatial 
skills, memory, working memory, cognitive control, and reward processing. SES 
explained over 30% of the variance in language, and a smaller but highly 
significant portion of the variance in most other systems. Statistically 
mediating factors and possible interventional approaches are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00600.x
PMID: 17552936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1689. Dev Sci. 2007 Jul;10(4):F15-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00595.x.

Visual category-selectivity for faces, places and objects emerges along 
different developmental trajectories.

Scherf KS(1), Behrmann M, Humphreys K, Luna B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, 
University of Pittsburgh, 3811 O'Hara Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. 
scherf@pitt.edu

The organization of category-selective regions in ventral visual cortex is well 
characterized in human adults. We investigated a crucial, previously 
unaddressed, question about how this organization emerges developmentally. We 
contrasted the developmental trajectories for face-, object-, and 
place-selective activation in the ventral visual cortex in children, 
adolescents, and adults. Although children demonstrated adult-like organization 
in object- and place-related cortex, as a group they failed to show consistent 
face-selective activation in classical face regions. The lack of a consistent 
neural signature for faces was attributable to (1) reduced face-selectivity and 
extent of activation within the regions that will become the FFA, OFA, and STS 
in adults, and (2) smaller volumes and considerable variability in the locus of 
face-selective activation in individual children. In contrast, adolescents 
showed an adult-like pattern of face-selective activation, although it was more 
right-lateralized. These findings reveal critical age-related differences in the 
emergence of category-specific functional organization in the visual cortex and 
support a model of brain development in which specialization emerges from 
interactions between experience-dependent learning and the maturing brain.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00595.x
PMID: 17552930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1690. Dev Sci. 2007 May;10(3):411-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00594.x.

Gravity bias in young and adult chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes): tests with a 
modified opaque-tubes task.

Tomonaga M(1), Imura T, Mizuno Y, Tanaka M.

Author information:
(1)Language and Intelligence Section, Primate Research Institute, Kyoto 
University, Inuyama, Aichi, Japan. tomonaga@pri.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Young human children at around 2 years of age fail to predict the correct 
location of an object when it is dropped from the top of an S-shape opaque tube. 
They search in the location just below the releasing point (Hood, 1995). This 
type of error, called a 'gravity bias', has recently been reported in dogs and 
monkeys. In the present study, we investigated whether young and adult 
chimpanzees also show such a gravity bias in a modified version of the original 
opaque-tube task. The original task by Hood and colleagues required the subject 
to search in a location after the object had fallen, while in the task reported 
here, subjects were required to predict the location before the object was 
dropped. Thus the present procedure does not involve explicit invisible 
displacement operations, one of the important components of the original 
procedure. In Experiment 1 both young (1.5-2.5-year-old) and adult chimpanzees 
predicted the location of falling food items below the releasing point even when 
crossed tubes were used. These gravity errors remained after the extensive 
experience of using the tubes themselves. Experiment 2 further tested adult and 
4-year-old chimpanzees under the set-up in which the straight and crossed tubes 
were simultaneously presented. The results were the same as those in the 
previous test, suggesting that developmental changes and learning effect do not 
affect the gravity bias in chimpanzees.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00594.x
PMID: 17444980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1691. Dev Sci. 2007 Mar;10(2):213-36. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00546.x.

Infant information processing and family history of specific language 
impairment: converging evidence for RAP deficits from two paradigms.

Choudhury N(1), Leppanen PH, Leevers HJ, Benasich AA.

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience, Rutgers University, Newark, 
NJ 07102, USA. naseem@axon.rutgers.edu

An infant's ability to process auditory signals presented in rapid succession 
(i.e. rapid auditory processing abilities [RAP]) has been shown to predict 
differences in language outcomes in toddlers and preschool children. Early 
deficits in RAP abilities may serve as a behavioral marker for language-based 
learning disabilities. The purpose of this study is to determine if performance 
on infant information processing measures designed to tap RAP and global 
processing skills differ as a function of family history of specific language 
impairment (SLI) and/or the particular demand characteristics of the paradigm 
used. Seventeen 6- to 9-month-old infants from families with a history of 
specific language impairment (FH+) and 29 control infants (FH-) participated in 
this study. Infants' performance on two different RAP paradigms (head-turn 
procedure [HT] and auditory-visual habituation/recognition memory [AVH/RM]) and 
on a global processing task (visual habituation/recognition memory [VH/RM]) was 
assessed at 6 and 9 months. Toddler language and cognitive skills were evaluated 
at 12 and 16 months. A number of significant group differences were seen: FH+ 
infants showed significantly poorer discrimination of fast rate stimuli on both 
RAP tasks, took longer to habituate on both habituation/recognition memory 
measures, and had lower novelty preference scores on the visual 
habituation/recognition memory task. Infants' performance on the two RAP 
measures provided independent but converging contributions to outcome. Thus, 
different mechanisms appear to underlie performance on operantly conditioned 
tasks as compared to habituation/recognition memory paradigms. Further, infant 
RAP processing abilities predicted to 12- and 16-month language scores above and 
beyond family history of SLI. The results of this study provide additional 
support for the validity of infant RAP abilities as a behavioral marker for 
later language outcome. Finally, this is the first study to use a battery of 
infant tasks to demonstrate multi-modal processing deficits in infants at risk 
for SLI.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00546.x
PMCID: PMC1924777
PMID: 17286846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1692. Dev Sci. 2007 Mar;10(2):190-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00545.x.

Acquisition of early words from single-word and sentential contexts.

Trehub SE(1), Shenfield T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto at Mississauga, Canada. 
sandra.trehub@utoronto.ca

Toddlers 15 and 18 months of age were exposed to audiovisual recordings of two 
novel words paired with novel toys. The words were presented in familiar 
sentence frames or in isolation. Linguistic context had a greater effect on 
younger than on older infants. Specifically, 15-month-old boys exhibited 
successful learning only in the context of single words, and 15-month-old girls 
did so only for words presented in sentences. Older infants acquired the new 
words from both contexts, and they learned more rapidly than younger infants. 
Receptive and expressive vocabulary made no independent contribution to 
performance.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00545.x
PMID: 17286843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1693. Dev Sci. 2007 Mar;10(2):183-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00548.x.

Crawling is associated with more flexible memory retrieval by 9-month-old 
infants.

Herbert J(1), Gross J, Hayne H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Sheffield, UK. 
J.S.Herbert@sheffield.ac.uk

In the present experiment, we used a deferred imitation paradigm to explore the 
effect of crawling on memory retrieval by 9-month-old human infants. Infants 
observed an experimenter demonstrate a single target action with a novel object 
and their ability to reproduce that action was assessed after a 24-hr delay. 
Some infants were tested with the demonstration stimulus in the demonstration 
context and some infants were tested with a different stimulus in a different 
context. Half of the infants in each test condition were crawling at the time of 
participation and half were not. Both crawling and non-crawling infants 
exhibited retention when tested with the demonstration stimulus in the 
demonstration context, but only infants who were crawling by 9 months of age 
exhibited retention when tested with a different stimulus in a different 
context. These findings demonstrate that the onset of independent locomotion is 
associated with more flexible memory retrieval during the first year of life.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00548.x
PMID: 17286842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1694. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):97-103. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00570.x.

Comparative cognitive development.

Matsuzawa T(1).

Author information:
(1)Primate Research Institute, Kyoto University, Inuyama, Aichi, Japan. 
matsuzaw@pri.kyoto-u.ac.jp

This paper aims to compare cognitive development in humans and chimpanzees to 
illuminate the evolutionary origins of human cognition. Comparison of 
morphological data and life history strongly highlights the common features of 
all primate species, including humans. The human mother-infant relationship is 
characterized by the physical separation of mother and infant, and the stable 
supine posture of infants, that enables vocal exchange, face-to-face 
communication, and manual gestures. The cognitive development of chimpanzees was 
studied using the participation observation method. It revealed that humans and 
chimpanzees show similar development until 3 months of age. However, chimpanzees 
have a unique type of social learning that lacks the social reference observed 
in human children. Moreover, chimpanzees have unique immediate short-term memory 
capabilities. Taken together, this paper presents a plausible evolutionary 
scenario for the uniquely human characteristics of cognition.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00570.x
PMID: 17181706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1695. Dev Sci. 2007 Jan;10(1):89-96. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00569.x.

Core knowledge.

Spelke ES(1), Kinzler KD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. 
spelke@wjh.harvard.edu

Human cognition is founded, in part, on four systems for representing objects, 
actions, number, and space. It may be based, as well, on a fifth system for 
representing social partners. Each system has deep roots in human phylogeny and 
ontogeny, and it guides and shapes the mental lives of adults. Converging 
research on human infants, non-human primates, children and adults in diverse 
cultures can aid both understanding of these systems and attempts to overcome 
their limits.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00569.x
PMID: 17181705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1696. Dev Sci. 2006 Nov;9(6):642-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00542.x.

Brain-behavior relationships in reading acquisition are modulated by 
socioeconomic factors.

Noble KG(1), Wolmetz ME, Ochs LG, Farah MJ, McCandliss BD.

Author information:
(1)Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Medical College of 
Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Functional neuroimaging may provide insights into the achievement gap in reading 
skill commonly observed across socioeconomic status (SES). Brain activation 
during reading tasks is known to be associated with individual differences in 
children's phonological language skills. By selecting children of equivalent 
phonological skill, yet diverse socioeconomic backgrounds, we use functional 
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to demonstrate that a child's experience, as 
operationalized by SES, can systematically modulate the relationship between 
phonological language skills and reading-related brain activity in left fusiform 
and perisylvian regions. Specifically, at lower socioeconomic levels, individual 
differences in skill result in large differences in brain activation. In 
contrast, as SES increases, this relationship between phonological language 
skill and activation is attenuated. Socioeconomic background factors are thus 
found to modulate brain-behavior relationships in reading, indicating that 
cognitive, social, and neurobiological influences on reading development are 
fundamentally intertwined.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00542.x
PMID: 17059461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1697. Dev Sci. 2006 Nov;9(6):628-41. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00541.x.

Action planning in young children's tool use.

Cox RF(1), Smitsman AW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Psychology, Radboud University Nijmegen, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. r.cox@psych.ru.nl

Tool use consists of at least two coupled phases of activities, involving 
multi-step problem solving. It therefore provides an interesting window on the 
development of planning in goal-directed behavior. This study investigated 
2-year-olds' and 3-year-olds' hand use in picking up and subsequently using a 
tool for displacing a target-object towards a specified goal location. The 
children had to use a stick (Experiment 1; N = 41 in total) or a cane (hooked 
stick) that was lying in varying starting orientations (Experiment 2; N = 32 in 
total). Age differences were found in the way goal-related information in 
combination with tool-related information influenced the choice of which hand to 
use in different phases of the task. A view on action planning is developed as a 
dynamic action-selection process for which actions to take. This process 
integrates factors that are internal to the child's action system (e.g. motor 
preferences and dexterity) with external (i.e. sensory) sources of information.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00541.x
PMID: 17059460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1698. Dev Sci. 2006 Nov;9(6):597-603. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00538.x.

Children use categories to maximize accuracy in estimation.

Duffy S(1), Huttenlocher J, Crawford LE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Rutgers University, Camden, NJ 08102, USA. 
seduffy@camden.rutgers.edu

The present study tests a model of category effects upon stimulus estimation in 
children. Prior work with adults suggests that people inductively generalize 
distributional information about a category of stimuli and use this information 
to adjust their estimates of individual stimuli in a way that maximizes average 
accuracy in estimation (see Huttenlocher, Hedges & Vevea, 2000). However, little 
is known about the developmental origin of this cognitive process. In the 
present study, 5- and 7-year-old children viewed stimuli that varied in size and 
reproduced each from memory. Consistent with the predictions of a Bayesian model 
of category effects on estimation, responses were adjusted toward the central 
value of the stimulus distribution. Additionally, the dispersion of the stimulus 
distribution affected the pattern of bias and variability of responses in a way 
that is predicted by the model. The results suggest that, like adults, children 
use categories for increasing average accuracy in estimating inexact stimuli.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00538.x
PMID: 17059457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1699. Dev Sci. 2006 Nov;9(6):583-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00536.x.

Infants' memory for musical performances.

Volkova A(1), Trehub SE, Schellenberg EG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Canada.

We evaluated 6- and 7-month-olds' preference and memory for expressive 
recordings of sung lullabies. In Experiment 1, both age groups preferred 
lower-pitched to higher-pitched renditions of unfamiliar lullabies. In 
Experiment 2, infants were tested after 2 weeks of daily exposure to a lullaby 
at one pitch level. Seven-month-olds listened significantly longer to the 
lullaby at a novel pitch level than at the original pitch level. Six-month-olds 
showed no preference but their low-pitch preference was eliminated. We conclude 
that infants' memory for musical performances is enhanced by the ecological 
validity of the materials. Moreover, infants' pitch preferences are influenced 
by their previous exposure and by the nature of the music.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00536.x
PMID: 17059455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1700. Dev Sci. 2006 Sep;9(5):F41-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00508.x.

Six-month-old infants use analog magnitudes to represent duration.

vanMarle K(1), Wynn K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, USA. kvanmarle@ruccs.rutgers.edu

While many studies have investigated duration discrimination in human adults and 
in nonhuman animals, few have investigated this ability in infants. Here, we 
report findings that 6-month-old infants are able to discriminate brief 
durations, and, as with other animal species, their discrimination function is 
characterized by Weber's Law: proportionate difference rather than absolute 
difference between stimuli determined successful discrimination. Importantly, 
paralleling results found with nonhuman animals, the Weber function that we 
found for infants' discrimination of time is the same as that found for their 
discrimination of number. Infants discriminated durations of an audiovisual 
event differing by a 1:2 ratio, but not those differing by a 2:3 ratio, over a 
range of durations. This suggests that (a) in human as in nonhuman animals, the 
same mental mechanism may underlie the ability to measure duration as to 
represent number, and (b) we may share this mental mechanism with other animal 
species.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00508.x
PMID: 16911436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1701. Dev Sci. 2006 Jul;9(4):379-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00503.x.

Physiological correlates of intellectual function in children with sickle cell 
disease: hypoxaemia, hyperaemia and brain infarction.

Hogan AM(1), Pit-ten Cate IM, Vargha-Khadem F, Prengler M, Kirkham FJ.

Author information:
(1)Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience Unit, Institute of Child Health, 
University College London, UK. a.hogan@soton.ac.uk

Lowered intelligence relative to controls is evident by mid-childhood in 
children with sickle cell disease. There is consensus that brain infarct 
contributes to this deficit, but the subtle lowering of IQ in children with 
normal MRI scans might be accounted for by chronic systemic complications 
leading to insufficient oxygen delivery to the brain. We investigated the 
relationship between daytime oxyhaemoglobin saturation (SpO2), cerebral blood 
flow velocity (CBFV) and intellectual function (IQ) using path-analysis in 30 
adolescents with sickle cell disease (mean age 17.4 years, SD 4.2). Initial 
analyses revealed that the association between SpO2 and Full Scale IQ (FSIQ) was 
fully mediated by increased CBFV, whereby SpO2 was negatively correlated with 
CBFV and CBFV was negatively correlated with FSIQ, i.e. decreases in oxygen 
saturation are associated with increases in velocity, and increased velocity is 
associated with lowered IQ scores. The mediated relationship suggests that 
lowered IQ may be a function of abnormal oxygen delivery to the brain. Further 
analyses showed that the association between CBFV and IQ was significant for 
verbal but not for performance IQ. The pathophysiology characteristic of SCD can 
interfere with brain function and constrain intellectual development, even in 
the absence of an infarct. This supports the hypothesis that lowered 
intellectual function is partly explained by chronic hypoxia, and has wider 
implications for our understanding of SCD pathophysiology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00503.x
PMID: 16764611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1702. Dev Sci. 2006 Jul;9(4):359-67. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00500.x.

The role of chronic hypoxia in the development of neurocognitive abnormalities 
in preterm infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia.

Raman L(1), Georgieff MK, Rao R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hennepin County Medical Center, Minneapolis, MN, 
USA.

Bronchopulmonary dysplasia is the most common pulmonary morbidity in preterm 
infants and is associated with chronic hypoxia. Animal studies have demonstrated 
structural, neurochemical and functional alterations due to chronic hypoxia in 
the developing brain. Long-term impairments in visual-motor, gross and fine 
motor, articulation, reading, mathematics, spatial memory and attention skills 
are prevalent in survivors of bronchopulmonary dysplasia, and impairments appear 
to correlate with the severity of hypoxia. However, due to the simultaneous 
occurrence of multiple neurodevelopmental risk factors, a primary or 
potentiating role for chronic hypoxia in these impairments has yet to be 
conclusively established.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00500.x
PMID: 16764609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1703. Dev Sci. 2003 Jun;6(3):312-28. doi: 10.1111/1467-7687.00287.

Attention affects the recognition of briefly presented visual stimuli in 
infants: an ERP study.

Richards JE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208, 
USA. richards-john@sc.edu

This study examined the effect of attention in infants on the ERP changes 
occurring during the recognition of briefly presented visual stimuli. Infants at 
ages 4.5, 6 and 7.5 months were presented with a Sesame Street movie that 
elicited periods of attention and inattention, and computer-generated stimuli 
were presented overlaid on the movie for 500 ms. One stimulus was familiar to 
the infants and was presented frequently, a second stimulus was familiar but 
presented infrequently, and a set of 14 novel stimuli were presented 
infrequently. An ERP component labeled the 'Nc' (Negative Central, about 450-550 
ms after stimulus onset) was larger during attention than inattention and 
increased in magnitude over the three testing ages during attention. Late slow 
waves in the ERP (from 1000 to 2000 ms post-stimulus onset) consisted of a 
positive slow wave in response to the infrequent familiar stimulus at all three 
testing ages. The late slow wave in response to the infrequent novel stimulus 
during attention was a positive slow wave for the 4.5-month-old infants, to a 
positive-negative slow wave for the 6-month-old infants and a negative slow wave 
for the 7.5-month-old infants. These results show attention facilitates the 
brain response during infant recognition memory and show that developmental 
changes in recognition memory are closely related to changes in attention.

DOI: 10.1111/1467-7687.00287
PMCID: PMC1464402
PMID: 16718304


1704. Dev Sci. 2006 May;9(3):288-94. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00491.x.

The face behind the mask: a developmental study.

Tottenham N(1), Leon AC, Casey BJ.

Author information:
(1)Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Medical College of 
Cornell University, New York, USA. nlt2002@med.cornell.edu

Faces are a rich and available source of social information, and the 
representation for faces is robust in adults (i.e. the face detection effect; 
Purcell & Stewart, 1988). The current study compared the developmental 
trajectory of the robustness of face perception against the trajectory for a 
non-face object. Participants (5-35 years old) were presented with rapid (17 and 
33 millisecond) presentations of face and house stimuli and were instructed to 
identify the object category of the stimulus (face or house). There was an 
interaction between object type and age such that the developmental slope for 
face identification was steeper than the slope for house identification for the 
17-millisecond presentation. These data show that faces are processed in a 
different way than a non-face object during the period from middle childhood 
through adolescence and adulthood, and this differential processing may involve 
the massive amount of exposure we have to faces.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00491.x
PMID: 16669799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1705. Dev Sci. 2006 May;9(3):278-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00490.x.

Switching between tasks and responses: a developmental study.

Crone EA(1), Bunge SA, van der Molen MW, Ridderinkhof KR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Leiden University, The Netherlands. 
ecrone@fsw.leidenuniv.nl

Task switching requires the ability to flexibly switch between task rules and 
responses, and is sensitive to developmental change. We tested the hypothesis 
that developmental changes in task switch performance are associated with 
changes in the facilitating or interfering effect of the previously retrieved 
stimulus-response (S-R) association. Three age groups (7-8-year-olds, 
10-12-year-olds and 20-25-year-olds) performed a two-choice reaction time (RT) 
task in which spatially compatible or incompatible responses were required. The 
RT costs associated with switching between tasks were larger when responses were 
repeated than when responses were alternated. Younger children showed a greater 
cost than adults when switching between tasks but repeating responses. This age 
difference decreased when the interval between the previous response and the 
upcoming stimulus increased. Switch costs were larger when switching to the 
compatible task than to the incompatible task, but this effect did not differ 
between age groups. These findings suggest that young children build up stronger 
transient associations between task sets and response sets, which interfere with 
their ability to switch to currently intended actions. A similar pattern has 
previously been observed for older adults (Mayr, 2001), suggesting a common 
contributor to task switching deficits across the life span.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00490.x
PMID: 16669798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1706. Dev Sci. 2006 May;9(3):F33-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00482.x.

Names in frames: infants interpret words in sentence frames faster than words in 
isolation.

Fernald A(1), Hurtado N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, CA 94305, USA. 
afernald@stanford.edu

In child-directed speech (CDS), adults often use utterances with very few words; 
many include short, frequently used sentence frames, while others consist of a 
single word in isolation. Do such features of CDS provide perceptual advantages 
for the child? Based on descriptive analyses of parental speech, some 
researchers argue that isolated words should help infants in word recognition by 
facilitating segmentation, while others predict no advantage. To address this 
question directly, we used online measures of speech processing in a 
looking-while-listening procedure. In two experiments, 18-month-olds were 
presented with familiar object names in isolation and in a sentence frame. 
Infants were 120 ms slower to interpret target words in isolation than when the 
same words were preceded by a familiar carrier phrase, suggesting that the 
sentence frame facilitated word recognition. Familiar frames may enable the 
infant to 'listen ahead' more efficiently for the focused word at the end of the 
sentence.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00482.x
PMCID: PMC3206318
PMID: 16669790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1707. Dev Sci. 2006 Mar;9(2):221-35. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00481.x.

Words and maps: developmental changes in mental models of spatial information 
acquired from descriptions and depictions.

Uttal DH(1), Fisher JA, Taylor HA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208-2710, 
USA. duttal@northwestern.edu

People acquire spatial information from many sources, including maps, verbal 
descriptions, and navigating in the environment. The different sources present 
spatial information in different ways. For example, maps can show many spatial 
relations simultaneously, but in a description, each spatial relation must be 
presented sequentially. The present research investigated how these source 
differences influence the mental models that children and adults form of the 
presented information. In Experiment 1, 8-year-olds, 10-year-olds and adults 
learned the layout of a six-room space either from verbal descriptions or from a 
map. They then constructed the configuration and pointed to target locations. 
Participants who learned from the map performed significantly better than those 
who learned from the description. Ten-year-olds performed nearly as well as 
adults did. The 8-year-olds' mental models differed substantially from the older 
children's and adults' mental models. The younger children retained the 
sequential information but did not integrate the relations into a survey-like 
cognitive map. Experiment 2 demonstrated that viewing the shape of the 
configuration, without seeing the map in full, could facilitate 8-year-olds' use 
of the verbal information and their ability to integrate the locations. The 
results demonstrate developmental differences in the mental representation of 
spatial information from descriptions. In addition, the results reveal that maps 
and other graphic representations can facilitate children's spatial thinking by 
helping them to transcend the sequential nature of language and direct 
experience.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00481.x
PMID: 16472322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1708. Dev Sci. 2006 Mar;9(2):207-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00480.x.

The development of emotional face processing during childhood.

Batty M(1), Taylor MJ.

Author information:
(1)CerCo-CNRS UMR 5549, Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France. 
m.batty@chu-tours.fr

Our facial expressions give others the opportunity to access our feelings, and 
constitute an important nonverbal tool for communication. Many recent studies 
have investigated emotional perception in adults, and our knowledge of neural 
processes involved in emotions is increasingly precise. Young children also use 
faces to express their internal states and perceive emotions in others, but 
little is known about the neurodevelopment of expression recognition. The goal 
of the current study was to determine the normal development of facial emotion 
perception. We recorded ERPs in 82 children 4 to 15 years of age during an 
implicit processing task with emotional faces. Task and stimuli were the same as 
those used and validated in an adult study; we focused on the components that 
showed sensitivity to emotions in adults (P1, N170 and frontal slow wave). An 
effect of the emotion expressed by faces was seen on the P1 in the youngest 
children. With increasing age this effect disappeared while an emotional 
sensitivity emerged on N170. Early emotional processing in young children 
differed from that observed in the adolescents, who approached adults. In 
contrast, the later frontal slow wave, although showing typical age effects, was 
more positive for neutral and happy faces across age groups. Thus, despite the 
precocious utilization of facial emotions, the neural processing involved in the 
perception of emotional faces develops in a staggered fashion throughout 
childhood, with the adult pattern appearing only late in adolescence.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00480.x
PMID: 16472321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1709. Dev Sci. 2006 Mar;9(2):F13-F21. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00468.x.

Infants show a facilitation effect for native language phonetic perception 
between 6 and 12 months.

Kuhl PK(1), Stevens E, Hayashi A, Deguchi T, Kiritani S, Iverson P.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences and Department of Speech and 
Hearing Sciences, University of Washington 98195, USA. pkkuhl@u.washington.edu

Patterns of developmental change in phonetic perception are critical to theory 
development. Many previous studies document a decline in nonnative phonetic 
perception between 6 and 12 months of age. However, much less experimental 
attention has been paid to developmental change in native-language phonetic 
perception over the same time period. We hypothesized that language experience 
in the first year facilitates native-language phonetic performance between 6 and 
12 months of age. We tested 6-8- and 10-12-month-old infants in the United 
States and Japan to examine native and nonnative patterns of developmental 
change using the American English /r-l/ contrast. The goals of the experiment 
were to: (a) determine whether facilitation characterizes native-language 
phonetic change between 6 and 12 months of age, (b) examine the decline 
previously observed for nonnative contrasts and (c) test directional asymmetries 
for consonants. The results show a significant increase in performance for the 
native-language contrast in the first year, a decline in nonnative perception 
over the same time period, and indicate directional asymmetries that are 
constant across age and culture. We argue that neural commitment to 
native-language phonetic properties explains the pattern of developmental change 
in the first year.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00468.x
PMID: 16472309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1710. Dev Sci. 2006 Jan;9(1):97-107. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00466.x.

Object boundaries influence toddlers' performance in a search task.

Shutts K(1), Keen R, Spelke ES.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, 
USA. shutts@fas.harvard.edu

Previous research has shown that young children have difficulty searching for a 
hidden object whose location depends on the position of a partly visible 
physical barrier. Across four experiments, we tested whether children's search 
errors are affected by two variables that influence adults' object-directed 
attention: object boundaries and proximity relations. Toddlers searched for a 
car that rolled down a ramp behind an occluding panel and stopped on contact 
with a barrier. The car's location on each trial depended on the placement of 
the barrier behind one of two doors in the panel. In Experiment 1, when a part 
of the car (a pompom on an antenna) was visible at the same distance from the 
object as the barrier wall in past research, search performance was above chance 
but below ceiling. In Experiments 2 and 3, when the visible part was close to 
the hidden body of the car and could be seen through one of two windows in the 
doors of the occluding panel, performance was near ceiling. In Experiment 4, 
when only the barrier was visible through one of the same windows, performance 
was at chance. Toddlers' search for a hidden object therefore is affected by the 
proximity of a visible part of the object, though not by the proximity of a 
separate visible landmark. These findings suggest a parallel between the object 
representations of young children and those of adults, whose attention is 
directed to objects and spreads in a gradient-like fashion within an object.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00466.x
PMID: 16445399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1711. Dev Sci. 2006 Jan;9(1):46-50. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00462.x.

Preference for consonance over dissonance by hearing newborns of deaf parents 
and of hearing parents.

Masataka N(1).

Author information:
(1)Japan Science and Technology Agency, Saitama, Japan. 
masataka@pri.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Behavioral preferences for consonance over dissonance were tested in hearing 
infants of deaf parents and in hearing infants of hearing parents when they were 
2 days old. Using a modified visual-fixation-based, auditory-preference 
procedure, I found that both 2-day-old infants of deaf parents and those of 
hearing parents looked longer at a visual stimulus when looking produced the 
original version of a Mozart minuet as opposed to a version altered to contain 
many dissonant intervals. The relative magnitude of such preference did not 
significantly differ whether their parents were deaf or hearing. Infants prefer 
consonance over dissonance, and the preference is present from birth and is not 
dependent on any specific prenatal or early postnatal experience.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00462.x
PMID: 16445395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1712. Dev Sci. 2006 Jan;9(1):F1-12. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00453.x.

Two languages, one developing brain: event-related potentials to words in 
bilingual toddlers.

Conboy BT(1), Mills DL.

Author information:
(1)Center for Research in Language, University of California, San Diego, USA. 
bconboy@u.washington.edu

Infant bilingualism offers a unique opportunity to study the relative effects of 
language experience and maturation on brain development, with each child serving 
as his or her own control. Event-related potentials (ERPs) to words were 
examined in 19- to 22-month-old English-Spanish bilingual toddlers. The 
children's dominant vs. nondominant languages elicited different patterns of 
neural activity in the lateral asymmetry of an early positive component (P100), 
and the latencies and distributions of ERP differences to known vs. unknown 
words from 200-400 and 400-600 ms. ERP effects also differed for 'high' and 
'low' vocabulary groups based on total conceptual vocabulary scores. The results 
indicate that the organization of language-relevant brain activity is linked to 
experience with language rather than brain maturation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00453.x
PMID: 16445386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1713. Dev Sci. 2005 Nov;8(6):551-66. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00447.x.

Children's implicit knowledge of harmony in Western music.

Schellenberg EG(1), Bigand E, Poulin-Charronnat B, Garnier C, Stevens C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto at Mississauga, ON, Canada. 
g.schellenberg@utoronto.ca

Three experiments examined children's knowledge of harmony in Western music. The 
children heard a series of chords followed by a final, target chord. In 
Experiment 1, French 6- and 11-year-olds judged whether the target was sung with 
the vowel /i/ or /u/. In Experiment 2, Australian 8- and 11-year-olds judged 
whether the target was played on a piano or a trumpet. In Experiment 3, Canadian 
8- and 11-year-olds judged whether the target sounded good (i.e. consonant) or 
bad (dissonant). The target was either the most stable chord in the established 
musical key (i.e. the tonic, based on do, the first note of the scale) or a less 
stable chord. Performance was faster (Experiments 1, 2 and 3) and more accurate 
(Experiment 3) when the target was the tonic chord. The findings confirm that 
children have implicit knowledge of syntactic functions that typify Western 
harmony.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00447.x
PMID: 16246247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1714. Dev Sci. 2005 Nov;8(6):500-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00441.x.

Fast mapping between a phrasal form and meaning.

Casenhiser D(1), Goldberg AE.

Author information:
(1)The Milton & Ethel Harris Research Initiative, York University, Canada.

This is the first study to investigate experimentally how children come to learn 
mappings between novel phrasal forms and novel meanings: a central task in 
learning a language. Two experiments are reported. In both studies 5- to 
7-year-old children watched a short set of video clips depicting objects 
appearing in various ways. Each scene was described using a novel verb embedded 
in a novel construction. Children who watched the videos and heard the 
accompanying description were able to match new descriptions that used the novel 
construction with new scenes of appearance. Moreover, our results suggest a 
facilitative effect for the disproportionately high frequency of occurrence of a 
single verb in a particular construction (such as has been found to exist in 
naturalistic input to children). While the fast mapping might be taken as an 
indication of innate knowledge that is specific to language, analogous effects 
in non-linguistic categorization tasks suggest that children are acquiring the 
new phrasal form with general cognitive skills.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00441.x
PMID: 16246241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1715. Dev Sci. 2005 Nov;8(6):F31-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.0434a.x.

Three-month-olds, but not newborns, prefer own-race faces.

Kelly DJ(1), Quinn PC, Slater AM, Lee K, Gibson A, Smith M, Ge L, Pascalis O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Sheffield, UK. 
david.kelly@sheffield.ac.uk

Adults are sensitive to the physical differences that define ethnic groups. 
However, the age at which we become sensitive to ethnic differences is currently 
unclear. Our study aimed to clarify this by testing newborns and young infants 
for sensitivity to ethnicity using a visual preference (VP) paradigm. While 
newborn infants demonstrated no spontaneous preference for faces from either 
their own- or other-ethnic groups, 3-month-old infants demonstrated a 
significant preference for faces from their own-ethnic group. These results 
suggest that preferential selectivity based on ethnic differences is not present 
in the first days of life, but is learned within the first 3 months of life. The 
findings imply that adults' perceptions of ethnic differences are learned and 
derived from differences in exposure to own- versus other-race faces during 
early development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.0434a.x
PMCID: PMC2566511
PMID: 16246233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1716. Dev Sci. 2005 Sep;8(5):432-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00432.x.

11-month-olds' knowledge of how familiar words sound.

Swingley D(1).

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Psycholinguistics, The Netherlands and Department of 
Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. 
swingley@psych.upenn.edu

During the first year of life, infants' perception of speech becomes tuned to 
the phonology of the native language, as revealed in laboratory discrimination 
and categorization tasks using syllable stimuli. However, the implications of 
these results for the development of the early vocabulary remain controversial, 
with some results suggesting that infants retain only vague, sketchy 
phonological representations of words. Five experiments using a preferential 
listening procedure tested Dutch 11-month-olds' responses to word, nonword and 
mispronounced-word stimuli. Infants listened longer to words than nonwords, but 
did not exhibit this response when words were mispronounced at onset or at 
offset. In addition, infants preferred correct pronunciations to onset 
mispronunciations. The results suggest that infants' encoding of familiar words 
includes substantial phonological detail.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00432.x
PMID: 16048516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1717. Dev Sci. 2005 Sep;8(5):393-401. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00427.x.

Reorientation by geometric and landmark information in environments of different 
size.

Vallortigara G(1), Feruglio M, Sovrano VA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Trieste, Italy. 
vallorti@univ.trieste.it

It has been found that disoriented children could use geometric information in 
combination with landmark information to reorient themselves in large but not in 
small experimental spaces. We tested domestic chicks in the same task and found 
that they were able to conjoin geometric and nongeometric (landmark) information 
to reorient themselves in both the large and the small space used. Moreover, 
chicks reoriented immediately when displaced from a large to a small 
experimental space and vice versa, suggesting that they used the relative 
metrics of the environment. However, when tested with a transformation (affine 
transformation) that alters the geometric relations between the target and the 
shape of the environment, chicks tended to make more errors based on geometric 
information when tested in the small than in the large space. These findings 
suggest that the reliance of the use of geometric information on the spatial 
scale of the environment is not restricted to the human species.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00427.x
PMID: 16048511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1718. Dev Sci. 2005 Jul;8(4):372-86. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00425.x.

Motion and color processing in school-age children and adults: an ERP study.

Coch D(1), Skendzel W, Grossi G, Neville H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Brain Development Lab, University of Oregon, USA. 
Donna.J.Coch@Dartmouth.edu

Stimuli designed to selectively elicit motion or color processing were used in a 
developmental event-related potential study with adults and children aged 6, 7 
and 8. A positivity at posterior site INZ (P-INZ) was greater to motion stimuli 
only in adults. The P1 and N1 were larger to color stimuli in both adults and 
children, but earlier to motion stimuli only in adults. Finally, the P2 was 
larger to color stimuli in adults but larger to motion stimuli in children, and 
earlier to motion stimuli only in children. The findings across components 
indicate development from middle childhood to adulthood in aspects of both the 
motion and color processing systems indexed by this paradigm, but are consistent 
with an hypothesis of a more protracted time course of development for the 
motion as compared to the color processing system.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00425.x
PMID: 15985071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1719. Dev Sci. 2005 Jul;8(4):333-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00421.x.

Sensitivity to triadic attention in early infancy.

Striano T(1), Stahl D.

Author information:
(1)Center for Advanced Studies, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. 
striano@cbs.mpg.de

In Study 1, 54 3-, 6- and 9-month-old infants interacted with an adult stranger 
who engaged in a face-to-face (dyadic) exchange. Dyadic interaction was halted 
when the adult turned away to look at an object. In a Joint Attention condition, 
the adult alternated visual attention between the infant and the object, and in 
a Look Away condition she looked away at the object only. Infants gazed and 
smiled more in the Joint Attention condition compared to in the Look Away 
condition. Infants' gazing to the target object interacted with age and 
condition. In Study 2, 37 3-, 6- and 9-month old infants interacted with an 
adult who coordinated visual attention and affect, affect only, visual attention 
only, or ignored the infant. Infants gazed reliably more at E when she 
coordinated both affect and attention and smiled reliably more when the adult 
coordinated affect and attention or attention only. The findings show a 
sensitivity to triadic attention by 3 months of age.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00421.x
PMID: 15985067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1720. Dev Sci. 2005 Jul;8(4):326-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00420.x.

Very young children are insensitive to picture- but not object-orientation.

Pierroutsakos SL(1), Deloache JS, Gound M, Bernard EN.

Author information:
(1)St Louis Community College, St Louis, MO, USA.

In two experiments on very young children's response to the orientation of 
pictures and objects, 18-, 24- and 30-month-old children showed no preference 
for upright pictures over inverted ones. More importantly, we found that 
children in all three age groups were equally accurate and equally fast at 
identifying depicted objects regardless of orientation. These studies further 
established that young children's insensitivity to picture orientation does not 
extend to objects. These results, in combination with the earlier ones, indicate 
that only gradually do young children come to share the picture orientation 
preference of adults and older children and that their adoption of the 
orientation convention is not based on changes in their ability to process 
upright and inverted images.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00420.x
PMID: 15985066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1721. Dev Sci. 2005 May;8(3):255-78. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00414.x.

Localizing cortical sources of event-related potentials in infants' covert 
orienting.

Richards JE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208, 
USA. richards-john@sc.edu

This study used cortical source analysis to locate potential cortical sources of 
event-related potentials (ERPs) during covert orienting in infants aged 14 and 
20 weeks. The infants were tested in a spatial cueing procedure. The reaction 
time to localize the target showed response facilitation for valid trials 
relative to invalid or neutral trials. High-density EEG (126 channels) was 
recorded during the task, and independent component analysis and equivalent 
current dipole analysis was used to estimate the cortical sources of the EEG 
during the task. There was a larger P1 ERP component on the valid trials than 
the other trials (P1 validity effect). The cortical source analysis suggested 
that this occurred due to activity in Brodmann's areas 18 and 19. A presaccadic 
ERP component occurred over the frontal scalp areas (-65 ms) and was larger to a 
target in a cued location than in uncued locations. A potential cortical source 
for this ERP component was the superior frontal gyrus on the inferior portion of 
the prefrontal cortex. Increases from 14 to 20 weeks in amplitude of the P1 
validity effect and the presaccadic ERP could be modeled by an increase in 
activation in the corresponding cortical areas.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00414.x
PMCID: PMC1464102
PMID: 15819757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1722. Dev Sci. 2005 May;8(3):226-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00411.x.

Breakdown of spatial parallel coding in children's drawing.

De Bruyn B(1), Davis A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Surrey, UK. b.de-bruyn@surrey.ac.uk

When drawing real scenes or copying simple geometric figures young children are 
highly sensitive to parallel cues and use them effectively. However, this 
sensitivity can break down in surprisingly simple tasks such as copying a single 
line where robust directional errors occur despite the presence of parallel 
cues. Before we can conclude that this directional bias is a limiting case it 
needs to be shown that any given parallel cues are indeed being processed. We 
achieved this by using a texture-defined contour where parallel cues are 
integral to the stimulus and thus cannot be ignored. Here we report that even 
when prolific parallel cues must have been processed, young children make robust 
directional errors when copying single lines. This finding demonstrates a major 
constraint on young children's spatial parallel coding.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00411.x
PMID: 15819754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1723. Dev Sci. 2005 May;8(3):F21-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00407.x.

A cross-sectional behavioral genetic analysis of task persistence in the 
transition to middle childhood.

Deater-Deckard K(1), Petrill SA, Thompson LA, DeThorne LS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Oregon, OR, USA. kirbydd@uoregon.edu

Task persistence, measured by a composite score of independent teacher, tester 
and observer reports, was examined using behavioral genetic analysis. 
Participants included 92 monozygotic and 137 same-sex dizygotic twin pairs in 
Kindergarten or 1st grade (4.3 to 7.9 years old). Task persistence was widely 
distributed, higher among older children, positively associated with 
standardized tests of cognitive performance and achievement, and negatively 
associated with parents', teachers' and observers' reports of behavioral 
problems. Cross-sectional analysis indicated a strong developmental shift from 
shared environment variance among younger children to additive genetic variance 
in older children.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00407.x
PMCID: PMC2659573
PMID: 15819750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1724. Dev Sci. 2005 Mar;8(2):199-209. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00406.x.

The robustness of learning through overhearing.

Akhtar N(1).

Author information:
(1)Psychology Department,University of California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA. 
nakhtar@ucsc.edu

Two studies examined the robustness of vocabulary learning through overhearing 
by testing 48 2-year-olds in contexts in which a potentially distracting 
activity was present (Studies 1 and 2) and in which the novel word was embedded 
in a directive rather than a labeling statement (Study 2). The children were 
equally good at learning a novel object label when there was no distracting 
activity as when there was. They were also able to learn the word when the 
object was not explicitly labeled. These findings suggest that young children 
are keen observers of third-party interactions and that their linguistic input 
consists of more than just speech directly addressed to them.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00406.x
PMID: 15720377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1725. Dev Sci. 2005 Mar;8(2):182-98. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00405.x.

They call it like they see it: spontaneous naming and attention to shape.

Samuelson LK(1), Smith LB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Iowa, Ell Seashore Hall, Iowa City, 
IA 52242, USA. larissa-samuelson@uiowa.edu

Two experiments explore children's spontaneous labeling of novel objects as a 
method to study early lexical access. The experiments also provide new evidence 
on children's attention to object shape when labeling objects. In Experiment 1, 
the spontaneous productions of 21 23- to 28-month-olds (mean 26;28) shown a set 
of novel, unnamed objects were analyzed both in terms of the specific words said 
and, via adult judgments, their likely perceptual basis. We found that 
children's spontaneous names were cued by the perceptual feature of shape. 
Experiment 2 examines the relation between spontaneous productions, name 
generalizations in a structured task, and vocabulary development in a group of 
children between 17 and 24 months of age (mean 21;6). Results indicate that 
object shape plays an important role in both spontaneous productions and novel 
noun generalization, but contrary to current hypotheses, children may name 
objects by shape from the earliest points of productive vocabulary development 
and this tendency may not be lexically specific.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00405.x
PMID: 15720376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1726. Dev Sci. 2005 Mar;8(2):162-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00403.x.

Brain potentials to native and non-native speech contrasts in 7- and 
11-month-old American infants.

Rivera-Gaxiola M(1), Silva-Pereyra J, Kuhl PK.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA 98195, USA.

Abstract Behavioral data establish a dramatic change in infants' phonetic 
perception between 6 and 12 months of age. Foreign-language phonetic 
discrimination significantly declines with increasing age. Using a longitudinal 
design, we examined the electrophysiological responses of 7- and 11-month-old 
American infants to native and non-native consonant contrasts. Analyses of the 
event-related potentials (ERP) of the group data at 7 and at 11 months of age 
demonstrated that infants' discriminatory ERP responses to the non-native 
contrast are present at 7 months of age but disappear by 11 months of age, 
consistent with the behavioral data reported in the literature. However, when 
the same infants were divided into subgroups based on individual ERP components, 
we found evidence that the infant brain remains sensitive to the non-native 
contrast at 11 months of age, showing differences in either the P150-250 or the 
N250-550 time window, depending upon the subgroup. Moreover, we observed an 
increase in infants' responsiveness to native language consonant contrasts over 
time. We describe distinct neural patterns in two groups of infants and suggest 
that their developmental differences may have an impact on language development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00403.x
PMID: 15720374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1727. Dev Sci. 2005 Jan;8(1):74-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00394.x.

Neurocognitive correlates of socioeconomic status in kindergarten children.

Noble KG(1), Norman MF, Farah MJ.

Author information:
(1)Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, 1300 York Avenue, Box 140, 
New York, NY 10021, USA. kimnoble@med.upenn.edu

Socioeconomic status (SES) is strongly associated with cognitive ability and 
achievement during childhood and beyond. Little is known about the developmental 
relationships between SES and specific brain systems or their associated 
cognitive functions. In this study we assessed neurocognitive functioning of 
kindergarteners from different socioeconomic backgrounds, using tasks drawn from 
the cognitive neuroscience literature in order to determine how childhood SES 
predicts the normal variance in performance across different neurocognitive 
systems. Five neurocognitive systems were examined: the occipitotemporal/visual 
cognition system, the parietal/spatial cognition system, the medial 
temporal/memory system, the left perisylvian/language system, and the 
prefrontal/executive system. SES was disproportionately associated with the last 
two, with low SES children performing worse than middle SES children on most 
measures of these systems. Relations among language, executive function, SES and 
specific aspects of early childhood experience were explored, revealing 
intercorrelations and a seemingly predominant role of individual differences in 
language ability involved in SES associations with executive function.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00394.x
PMID: 15647068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1728. Dev Sci. 2005 Jan;8(1):F13-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00385.x.

Twelve- and 18-month-olds copy actions in terms of goals.

Carpenter M(1), Call J, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Deutscher Platz 6, 
D-04103 Leipzig, Germany. carpenter@eva.mpg.de

In the context of an imitation game, 12- and 18-month-old infants saw an adult 
do such things as make a toy mouse hop across a mat (with sound effects). In one 
condition (House), the adult ended by placing the mouse in a toy house, whereas 
in another condition (No House) there was no house present at the final 
location. Infants at both ages usually simply put the mouse in the house 
(ignoring the hopping motion and sound effects) in the House condition, 
presumably because they interpreted the adult's action in terms of this final 
goal and so ignored the behavioral means. In contrast, infants copied the 
adult's action (both the hopping motion and the sound effects) when no house was 
present, presumably because here infants saw the action itself as the adult's 
only goal. From very early, infants' social learning is flexible: infants focus 
on and copy either the end or the means of an adult action as required by the 
context.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00385.x
PMID: 15647059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1729. Dev Sci. 2005 Jan;8(1):F1-F12. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00384.x.

Links between social and linguistic processing of speech in preschool children 
with autism: behavioral and electrophysiological measures.

Kuhl PK(1), Coffey-Corina S, Padden D, Dawson G.

Author information:
(1)Center on Human Development and Disabilities and Department of Speech and 
Hearing Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. 
pkkuhl@washington.edu

Data on typically developing children suggest a link between social interaction 
and language learning, a finding of interest both to theories of language and 
theories of autism. In this study, we examined social and linguistic processing 
of speech in preschool children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and 
typically developing chronologically matched (TDCA) and mental age matched 
(TDMA) children. The social measure was an auditory preference test that pitted 
'motherese' speech samples against non-speech analogs of the same signals. The 
linguistic measure was phonetic discrimination assessed with mismatch negativity 
(MMN), an event-related potential (ERP). As a group, children with ASD differed 
from controls by: (a) demonstrating a preference for the non-speech analog 
signals, and (b) failing to show a significant MMN in response to a syllable 
change. When ASD children were divided into subgroups based on auditory 
preference, and the ERP data reanalyzed, ASD children who preferred non-speech 
still failed to show an MMN, whereas ASD children who preferred motherese did 
not differ from the controls. The data support the hypothesis of an association 
between social and linguistic processing in children with ASD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00384.x
PMID: 15647058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1730. Dev Sci. 2004 Jun;7(3):378-88. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00354.x.

Perceptual complexity and form class cues in novel word extension tasks: how 
4-year-old children interpret adjectives and count nouns.

Sandhofer CM(1), Smith LB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, 90095-1563, 
USA. sandhof@psych.ucla.edu

Two experiments examined the role of perceptual complexity, object familiarity 
and form class cues on how children interpret novel adjectives and count nouns. 
Four-year-old children participated in a forced-choice match-to-target task in 
which an exemplar was named with a novel word and children were asked to choose 
another one that matched the exemplar in either shape or material In experiment 
1, 56 children were provided with lexical form class cues suggestive of 
adjectives. The results of Experiment 1 showed that perceptual complexity and 
not object familiarity determined whether children made material or shape 
matches. In Experiment 2, 56 children were provided with lexical form class cues 
suggestive of count nouns. The results of Experiment 2 showed that neither 
perceptual complexity nor object familiarity affected children's selections in 
the matching task. When provided with lexical form class cues suggestive of a 
count noun, children selected shape matches. Thus the results suggest that the 
perceptual properties of the objects presented to children coupled with the 
particular lexical form class cue determine which features of objects children 
attend to when interpreting novel words.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00354.x
PMID: 15595376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1731. Dev Sci. 2004 Jun;7(3):340-59. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00352.x.

Young children with autism show atypical brain responses to fearful versus 
neutral facial expressions of emotion.

Dawson G(1), Webb SJ, Carver L, Panagiotides H, McPartland J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Washington, Seattle, 98195, USA. 
dawson@u.washington.edu

Evidence suggests that autism is associated with impaired emotion perception, 
but it is unknown how early such impairments are evident. Furthermore, most 
studies that have assessed emotion perception in children with autism have 
required verbal responses, making results difficult to interpret. This study 
utilized high-density event-related potentials (ERPs) to investigate whether 
3-4-year-old children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) show differential 
brain activity to fear versus neutral facial expressions. It has been shown that 
normal infants as young as 7 months of age show differential brain responses to 
faces expressing different emotions. ERPs were recorded while children passively 
viewed photos of an unfamiliar woman posing a neutral and a prototypic fear 
expression. The sample consisted of 29 3-4-year-old children with ASD and 22 
chronological age-matched children with typical development. Typically 
developing children exhibited a larger early negative component (N300) to the 
fear than to the neutral face. In contrast, children with ASD did not show the 
difference in amplitude of this early ERP component to the fear versus neutral 
face. For a later component, typically developing children exhibited a larger 
negative slow wave (NSW) to the fear than to the neutral face, whereas children 
with autism did not show a differential NSW to the two stimuli. In children with 
ASD, faster speed of early processing (i. e. N300 latency) of the fear face was 
associated with better performance on tasks assessing social attention (social 
orienting, joint attention and attention to distress). These data suggest that 
children with ASD, as young as 3 years of age, show a disordered pattern of 
neural responses to emotional stimuli.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00352.x
PMID: 15595374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1732. Dev Sci. 2004 Jun;7(3):325-39. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00351.x.

Attention and inhibition in bilingual children: evidence from the dimensional 
change card sort task.

Bialystok E(1), Martin MM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, York University, Toronto, Canada. ellenb@yorku.ca

In a previous study, a bilingual advantage for preschool children in solving the 
dimensional change card sort task was attributed to superiority in inhibition of 
attention (Bialystok, 1999). However, the task includes difficult 
representational demands to encode and interpret the task stimuli, and 
bilinguals may also have profited from superior representational abilities. This 
possibility is examined in three studies. In Study 1, bilinguals outperformed 
monolinguals on versions of the problem containing moderate representational 
demands but not on a more demanding condition. Studies 2 and 3 demonstrated that 
bilingual children were more skilled than monolinguals when the target 
dimensions were perceptual features of the stimulus and that the two groups were 
equivalent when the target dimensions were semantic features. The conclusions 
are that bilinguals have better inhibitory control for ignoring perceptual 
information than monolinguals do but are not more skilled in representation, 
confirming the results of the original study. The results also identify the 
ability to ignore an obsolete display feature as the critical difficulty in 
solving this task.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00351.x
PMID: 15595373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1733. Dev Sci. 2004 Sep;7(4):431-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00363.x.

The Thatcher illusion and face processing in infancy.

Bertin E(1), Bhatt RS.

Author information:
(1)University of Kentucky, USA. ebertin@eva.mpg.de

Adults readily detect changes in face patterns brought about by the inversion of 
eyes and mouth when the faces are viewed upright but not when they are viewed 
upside down. Research suggests that this illusion (the Thatcher illusion) is 
caused by the interfering effects of face inversion on the processing of 
second-order relational information (fine spatial information such as the 
distance between the eyes). In the current study, 6-month-olds discriminated 
'thatcherized' faces when they were viewed upright but not when they were viewed 
upside down. These results are consistent with the notion that 6-month-olds are 
sensitive to second-order relational information while processing faces.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00363.x
PMID: 15484591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1734. Dev Sci. 2004 Sep;7(4):425-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00362.x.

Infants' attribution of a goal to a morphologically unfamiliar agent.

Shimizu YA(1), Johnson SC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Jordan Hall, Building 420, Stanford University, 
Stanford, California 94305, USA. yalpha@stanford.edu

How do infants identify the psychological actors in their environments? Three 
groups of 12-month-old infants were tested for their willingness to encode a 
simple approach behavior as goal-directed as a function of whether it was 
performed by (1) a human hand, (2) a morphologically unfamiliar green object 
that interacted with a confederate and behaved intentionally, or (3) the same 
unfamiliar green object that behaved in a matched, but apparently random manner. 
Using a visual habituation technique, only infants in the first two conditions 
were found to encode the approach behavior as goal-directed Thus infants appear 
able to attribute goals to non-human, even unfamiliar agents. These results 
imply that by the end of the first year of life infants have a broad notion of 
what counts as an agent that cannot easily be reduced to humans, objects that 
are perceptually similar to humans, or objects that display self-propulsion.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00362.x
PMID: 15484590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1735. Dev Sci. 2004 Sep;7(4):391-414. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00357.x.

Infants' reasoning about hidden objects: evidence for event-general and 
event-specific expectations.

Baillargeon R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Illinois, Champaign 61820, USA. 
rbaillar@s.psych.uiuc.edu

Comment in
    Dev Sci. 2004 Sep;7(4):415-7; discussion 422-4.
    Dev Sci. 2004 Sep;7(4):417-9; discussion 422-4.
    Dev Sci. 2004 Sep;7(4):419-21; discussion 422-4.

Research over the past 20 years has revealed that even very young infants 
possess expectations about physical events, and that these expectations undergo 
significant developments during the first year of life. In this article, I first 
review some of this research, focusing on infants' expectations about occlusion, 
containment, and covering events, all of which involve hidden objects. Next, I 
present an account of infants' physical reasoning that integrates these various 
findings, and describe new experiments that test predictions from this account. 
Finally, because all of the research I discuss uses the violation-of-expectation 
method, I address recent concerns about this method and summarize new findings 
that help alleviate these concerns.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00357.x
PMCID: PMC4215973
PMID: 15484586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1736. Dev Sci. 2004 Feb;7(1):74-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00324.x.

Effect of visual experience on face processing: a developmental study of 
inversion and non-native effects.

Sangrigoli S(1), de Schonen S.

Author information:
(1)Developmental Neurocognition Unit, LCD, CNRS-Paris 5, Robert Debré Hospital, 
Paris, France. sandy.sangrigoli@univ-paris5.fr

In adults, three phenomena are taken to demonstrate an experience effect on face 
recognition: an inversion effect, a non-native face effect (so-called 
'other-race' effect) and their interaction. It is crucial for our understanding 
of the developmental perception mechanisms of object processing to discover when 
these effects are present in childhood. Three- to 5-year-old Caucasian children 
(N = 64) were asked to recognize upright and inverted Caucasian and Asian faces. 
Recognition was tested with a forced-choice procedure. Overall performance 
improved with age. However, there was an interaction between the inversion and 
non-native effects that did not change with age between ages 3 and 5: (a) the 
inversion effect with native (Caucasian) faces was larger than with non-native 
(Asian) faces, and (b) upright native faces were recognized better than upright 
non-native faces. These results show that face orientation and morphology 
constrain face processing in 3- to 5-year-olds. The first 3 years of life during 
which the brain and the environment interact are sufficient to build a 
face-processing system that constrains recognition.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00324.x
PMID: 15323120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1737. Dev Sci. 2004 Feb;7(1):56-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00323.x.

Reorganization in coping behavior at 1 1/2 years: dynamic systems and normative 
change.

Lewis MD(1), Zimmerman S, Hollenstein T, Lamey AV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Development and Applied Psychology, Ontario Institute for 
Studies in Education, University of Toronto, Canada. mlewis@oise.utoronto.ca

By the age of 1 year toddlers demonstrate distinct coping habits for dealing 
with frustration. However, these habits may be open to change and reorganization 
at subsequent developmental junctures. We investigated change in coping habits 
at 18-20 months, a normative age for major advances in social cognition, 
focusing on the dynamic systems principles of fluctuation and novelty at 
transitions. Specifically, we asked whether month-to-month fluctuation, novel 
behavioral habits and real-time variability increased at the age of a normative 
transition, despite individual differences in the content of behavior. Infants 
were given frustrating toys while their mothers sat nearby without helping, on 
monthly visits at 14-25 months (before, during and after the hypothesized 
transition). State space grids representing patterns of behavioral durations 
were constructed for each episode and compared over age. As predicted, 
month-to-month fluctuation in grid patterns increased temporarily between 17 and 
20 months, partly independently of a concurrent peak in distress, and new 
behavioral habits replaced old ones at the same age. Coping habits changed 
differently for high-and low-distressed toddlers. However, changes in real-time 
variability did not generally meet our expectations.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00323.x
PMID: 15323119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1738. Dev Sci. 2004 Feb;7(1):48-55. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00322.x.

Training 2;6-year-olds to produce the transitive construction: the role of 
frequency, semantic similarity and shared syntactic distribution.

Abbot-Smith K(1), Lieven E, Tomasello M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, 
Leipzig, Germany. smith@eva.mpg.de

Childers and Tomasello (2001) found that training 2 1/2-year-olds on the English 
transitive construction greatly improves their performance on a post-test in 
which they must use novel verbs in that construction. In the current study, we 
replicated Childers and Tomasello's finding, but using a much lower frequency of 
transitive verbs and models in training. We also used novel verbs that were of a 
different semantic class to our training verbs, demonstrating that semantic 
homogeneity is not crucial for generalization. We also replicated the finding 
that 4-year-olds are significantly more productive than 2 1/2-year-olds with the 
transitive construction, with the new finding that this is also true for verbs 
of emission. In addition, 'shared syntactic distribution' of novel verb and 
training verbs was found to have no observable effect on the number of 2 
1/2-year-olds who were productive in the post-test.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00322.x
PMID: 15323118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1739. Dev Sci. 2004 Feb;7(1):42-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00321.x.

Auditory-oral matching behavior in newborns.

Chen X(1), Striano T, Rakoczy H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut, USA.

Twenty-five newborn infants were tested for auditory-oral matching behavior when 
presented with the consonant sound /m/ and the vowel sound /a/ - a precursor 
behavior to vocal imitation. Auditory-oral matching behavior by the infant was 
operationally defined as showing the mouth movement appropriate for producing 
the model sound just heard (mouth opening for /a/ and mouth clutching for /m/), 
even when the infant produced no sound herself. With this new dependent measure, 
the current study is the first to show matching behavior to consonant sounds in 
newborns: infants showed significantly more instances of mouth opening after /a/ 
models than after /m/ models, and more instances of mouth clutching after /m/ 
models than after /a/ models. The results are discussed in the context of 
theories of active intermodal mapping and innate releasing mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00321.x
PMID: 15323117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1740. Dev Sci. 2004 Feb;7(1):33-41. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00320.x.

Two-year-olds' sensitivity to speakers' intent: an alternative account of 
Samuelson and Smith.

Diesendruck G(1), Markson L, Akhtar N, Reudor A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology Bar-Ilan University, Israel. dieseng@mail.biu.ac.il

Seventy-two 2-year-olds participated in a study designed to test two competing 
accounts of the effect of contextual change on children's ability to learn a 
word for an object. The mechanistic account hypothesizes that any change in 
context that highlights a target object will lead to word learning; the 
social-pragmatic account maintains that a change in context must be perceived as 
relevant to the speaker's communicative intentions. Consistent with the latter 
account, we found that children learned the word when a change in context was 
intentional but not when it was accidental, and children failed to learn the 
word for the highlighted object when a speaker naive to the preceding context 
named the object.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00320.x
PMID: 15323116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1741. Dev Sci. 2004 Apr;7(2):149-57. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00332.x.

Modeling developmental transitions in adaptive resonance theory.

Raijmakers ME(1), Molenaar PC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Psychology, University of Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. mraijmakers@fmg.uva.nl

Neural networks are applied to a theoretical subject in developmental 
psychology: modeling developmental transitions. Two issues that are involved 
will be discussed: discontinuities and acquiring qualitatively new knowledge. We 
will argue that by the appearance of a bifurcation, a neural network can show 
discontinuities and may acquire qualitatively new knowledge. First, it is shown 
that biological principles of neurite outgrowth result in self-organization in a 
neural network, which is strongly dependent on a bifurcation in the activity 
dynamics. Second, the effect of a bifurcation due to morphological change is 
investigated in an Adaptive Resonance Theory (ART) network. Exact ART networks 
with quantitative differences in network structure at the category level show 
qualitatively different dynamical regimes, which are separated by bifurcations. 
These qualitative differences in dynamics affect the cognitive function of Exact 
ART: Representations of learned categories are local or distributed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00332.x
PMID: 15320373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1742. Dev Sci. 2004 Apr;7(2):141-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00331.x.

Hebbian learning and development.

Munakata Y(1), Pfaffly J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Colorado Boulder, 80309-0345, USA. 
munakata@psych.colorado.edu

Hebbian learning is a biologically plausible and ecologically valid learning 
mechanism. In Hebbian learning, 'units that fire together, wire together'. Such 
learning may occur at the neural level in terms of long-term potentiation (LTP) 
and long-term depression (LTD). Many features of Hebbian learning are relevant 
to developmental theorizing, including its self-organizing nature and its 
ability to extract statistical regularities from the environment. Hebbian 
learning mechanisms may also play an important role in critical periods during 
development, and in a number of other developmental phenomena.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00331.x
PMID: 15320372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1743. Dev Sci. 2021 Jan 23:e13085. doi: 10.1111/desc.13085. Online ahead of print.

"Look! It is not a bamoule!": 18- and 24-month-olds can use negative sentences 
to constrain their interpretation of novel word meanings.

de Carvalho A(1), Crimon C(2), Barrault A(2), Trueswell J(3), Christophe 
A(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Psychologie du Développement et de l'Éducation de l'Enfant - 
LaPsyDÉ, La Sorbonne, Université de Paris, CNRS, Paris, France.
(2)Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et Psycholinguistique, DEC-ENS/EHESS/CNRS, 
Ecole Normale Supérieure - PSL University, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Maternité Port-Royal, AP-HP, Université de Paris, Paris, France.

Two word-learning experiments were conducted to investigate the understanding of 
negative sentences in 18- and 24-month-old children. In Experiment 1, after 
learning that bamoule means "penguin" and pirdaling means "cartwheeling," 
18-month-olds (n = 48) increased their looking times when listening to negative 
sentences rendered false by their visual context ("Look! It is not a bamoule!" 
while watching a video showing a penguin cartwheeling); however, they did not 
change their looking behavior when negative sentences were rendered true by 
their context ("Look! It is not pirdaling!" while watching a penguin spinning). 
In Experiment 2, 24-month-olds (n = 48) were first exposed to a teaching phase 
in which they saw a new cartoon character on a television (e.g., a blue 
monster). Participants in the affirmative condition listened to sentences like 
"It's a bamoule!" and participants in the negative condition listened to 
sentences like "It's not a bamoule!." At test, all participants were asked to 
find the bamoule while viewing two images: the familiar character from the 
teaching phase versus a novel character (e.g., a red monster). Results showed 
that participants in the affirmative condition looked more to the familiar 
character (i.e., they learned the familiar character was a bamoule) than 
participants in the negative condition. Together, these studies provide the 
first evidence for the understanding of negative sentences during the second 
year of life. The ability to understand negative sentences so early might 
support language acquisition, providing infants with a tool to constrain the 
space of possibilities for word meanings.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13085
PMID: 33484223


1744. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13046. doi: 10.1111/desc.13046. Epub 2020 Nov 30.

The handwriting brain in middle childhood.

Palmis S(1), Velay JL(1), Habib M(1), Anton JL(2), Nazarian B(2), Sein J(2), 
Longcamp M(1).

Author information:
(1)Aix-Marseille Univ, CNRS, LNC, Marseille, France.
(2)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, INT, Inst Neurosci Timone, Marseille, France.

While the brain network supporting handwriting has previously been defined in 
adults, its organization in children has never been investigated. We compared 
the handwriting network of 23 adults and 42 children (8- to 11-year-old). 
Participants were instructed to write the alphabet, the days of the week, and to 
draw loops while being scanned. The handwriting network previously described in 
adults (five key regions: left dorsal premotor cortex, superior parietal lobule 
(SPL), fusiform and inferior frontal gyri, and right cerebellum) was also 
strongly activated in children. The right precentral gyrus and the right 
anterior cerebellum were more strongly activated in adults than in children, 
while the left fusiform gyrus (FuG) was more strongly activated in children than 
in adults. Finally, we found that, contrary to adults, children recruited 
prefrontal regions to complete the writing task. This constitutes the first 
comparative investigation of the neural correlates of writing in children and 
adults. Our results suggest that the network supporting handwriting is already 
established in middle childhood. They also highlight the major role of 
prefrontal regions in learning this complex skill and the importance of right 
precentral regions and cerebellum in the performance of automated handwriting.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13046
PMID: 33035404


1745. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13037. doi: 10.1111/desc.13037. Epub 2020 Oct 8.

Gender differences in mothers' spatial language use and children's mental 
rotation abilities in Preschool and Kindergarten.

Ralph YK(1), Berinhout K(1), Maguire MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Callier Center for Communication Disorders, The University of Texas, Dallas, 
Texas, USA.

Mental rotation has emerged as an important predictor of success in Science, 
Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM). By the age of 4.5 years, boys 
outperform girls in these abilities. Because parents use less spatial language 
with girls at this age (Pruden and Levine, 2017), the amount of spatial language 
that children are exposed to at home is believed to be one potential contributor 
to this disparity in preschool age children. To date, it is unclear if this 
gender difference continues when children enter school. To address this question 
in this study, children not yet in kindergarten (PreK) and kindergarten and 
first grade children (K+) were recorded playing with their mothers using 
magnetic tile toys followed by children's completion of a mental rotation task. 
As expected, mothers used more spatial language with PreK boys than girls; 
however, this relationship reversed in K+, with mothers using significantly more 
spatial language with girls than boys. Surprisingly, despite this, boys 
outperformed girls on the mental rotation task. These findings suggest that 
although girls' exposure to spatial language is higher after entry into school, 
this language difference is not reflected in increases in mental rotation 
abilities. Thus, earlier exposure to spatial language may be vital for the 
development of mental rotation abilities.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13037
PMID: 32931085


1746. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13038. doi: 10.1111/desc.13038. Epub 2020 Oct 1.

Partner in crime: Beneficial cooperation overcomes children's aversion to 
antisocial others.

Myslinska Szarek K(1), Bocian K(1)(2), Baryla W(1), Wojciszke B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology in Sopot, SWPS University of Social Sciences and 
Humanities, Sopot, Poland.
(2)School of Psychology, University of Kent, Canterbury, UK.

Young children display strong aversion toward antisocial individuals, but also 
feel responsible for joint activities and express a strong sense of group 
loyalty. This paper aims to understand how beneficial cooperation with an 
antisocial partner shapes preschoolers' attitudes, preferences, and moral 
judgments concerning antisocial individuals. We argue that although young 
children display a strong aversion to antisocial characters, children may 
overcome this aversion when they stand to personally benefit. In Study 1a 
(N = 62), beneficial cooperation with an antisocial partner resulted in the 
children's later preference for the antisocial partner over the neutral partner. 
Study 1b (N = 91) replicated this effect with discrete measurement of liking 
(resource distribution) and showed that children rewarded more and punished less 
the antisocial partner in the beneficial cooperation setting. In Study 2, 
(N = 58), children's aversion to an antisocial in-group member decreased when 
the cooperation benefited other in-group members. Finally, in Study 3 (N = 62), 
when children passively observed the antisocial individual, personal benefits 
from the antisocial behavior did not change their negative attitude toward the 
antisocial individual. Overall, beneficial cooperation with the antisocial 
partner increased the children's liking and preference for the antisocial 
partner, but did not affect the children's moral judgments. Presented evidence 
suggests that by the age of 4, children develop a strong obligation to 
collaborate with partners who help them to acquire resources-even when these 
partners harm third parties, which children recognize as immoral.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13038
PMID: 32931056


1747. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13029. doi: 10.1111/desc.13029. Epub 2020 Sep 4.

Visual input to the left versus right eye yields differences in face preferences 
in 3-month-old infants.

Dalrymple KA(1), Khan AF(1), Duchaine B(2), Elison JT(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Child Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA.
(2)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Dartmouth College, Hanover, 
USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA.

From birth, infants prefer looking at faces over scrambled faces. This face 
input is important for the development of face processing: individuals who 
experienced early visual deprivation due to congenital cataracts have 
long-lasting face processing deficits. Interestingly, the deficits are 
eye-specific such that left eye cataracts disrupt the development of face 
processing, whereas right eye cataracts do not. This raises the question of 
whether infant face preferences are driven primarily by faces observed through 
the left eye. To investigate this, we presented 3-month-old infants with intact 
faces paired with scrambled faces. Infants viewed the moving stimuli 
binocularly, only with their left eye, or only with their right eye. Infants 
viewing stimuli binocularly or with only the left eye spent significantly more 
time looking at intact faces than scrambled faces, but this effect was equivocal 
in infants viewing stimuli through only their right eye. Infants in the 
binocular group had the greatest preference for faces, and this preference was 
greater than the right eye group's preference for faces. The left eye group's 
preference for faces was not statistically different from the other two groups' 
preference for faces, but additional analyses revealed a correlation between 
preference for faces and age for the right eye group only, indicating that 
preference for faces seen with the right eye increase from 3 to 4 months of age. 
These results indicate that the left eye plays a special role in face processing 
at, or before 3 months of age, but a preference for faces through the right eye 
emerges soon after.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13029
PMCID: PMC7870722
PMID: 32772413

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement The authors have 
no conflict of interest to report.


1748. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13018. doi: 10.1111/desc.13018. Epub 2020 Aug 27.

Continuous developmental change explains discontinuities in word learning.

Fourtassi A(1), Regan S(1), Frank MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.

Cognitive development is often characterized in terms of discontinuities, but 
these discontinuities can sometimes be apparent rather than actual and can arise 
from continuous developmental change. To explore this idea, we use as a case 
study the finding by Stager and Werker (1997) that children's early ability to 
distinguish similar sounds does not automatically translate into word learning 
skills. Early explanations proposed that children may not be able to encode 
subtle phonetic contrasts when learning novel word meanings, thus suggesting a 
discontinuous/stage-like pattern of development. However, later work has 
revealed (e.g., through using more precise testing methods) that children do 
encode such contrasts, thus favoring a continuous pattern of development. Here, 
we propose a probabilistic model that represents word knowledge in a graded 
fashion and characterizes developmental change as improvement in the precision 
of this graded knowledge. Our model explained previous findings in the 
literature and provided a new prediction - the referents' visual similarity 
modulates word learning accuracy. The models' predictions were corroborated by 
human data collected from both preschool children and adults. The broader impact 
of this work is to show that computational models, such as ours, can help us 
explore the extent to which episodes of cognitive development that are typically 
thought of as discontinuities may emerge from simpler, continuous mechanisms.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13018
PMID: 32654329


1749. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13015. doi: 10.1111/desc.13015. Epub 2020 Jul 29.

The visual array task: A novel gaze-based measure of object label and category 
knowledge.

Hauschild KM(1), Pomales-Ramos A(1), Strauss MS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Visual attention measures of receptive vocabulary place minimal task demand on 
participants and produce a more accurate measure of language comprehension than 
parent report measures. However, current gaze-based measures employ visual 
comparisons limited to two simultaneous items. With this limitation, the degree 
of similarity of the target to the distractor can have a significant impact on 
the interpretation of task performance. The current study evaluates a novel 
gaze-based paradigm that includes an eight-item array. This visual array task 
(VAT) combines the theoretical frameworks of the Intermodal Preferential Looking 
Paradigm (IPLP) and looking-while-listening (LWL) methods of language 
comprehension measurement but using a larger array of simultaneously presented 
items. The use of a larger array of items and the inclusion of a superordinate 
category contrast may provide a more sensitive measure of receptive vocabulary 
as well as an understanding of the extent to which early word comprehension 
reflects knowledge of broader categories. Results indicated that the tested VAT 
was a sensitive measure of both object label and category knowledge. This 
paradigm provides researchers with a flexible and efficient task to measure 
language comprehension and category knowledge while reducing behavioral demands 
placed on participants.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13015
PMCID: PMC7790987
PMID: 32640086

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement: Kathryn M. 
Hauschild declares that she has no conflict of interest. Anamiguel Pomales-Ramos 
declares that she has no conflict of interest. Mark S. Strauss declares that he 
has no conflict of interest.


1750. Dev Sci. 2021 Mar;24(2):e13011. doi: 10.1111/desc.13011. Epub 2020 Jul 10.

The effects of bilingualism on attentional processes in the first year of life.

Kalashnikova M(1), Pejovic J(1)(2)(3), Carreiras M(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)BCBL - Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language, San Sebastian, Spain.
(2)University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, San Sebastian, Spain.
(3)Laboratorio de Fonetica & Lisbon Baby Lab, Centro de Linguistica, Faculdade 
de Letras, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.
(4)Ikerbasque - Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain.

Bilingualism is a powerful experiential factor, and its effects have been 
proposed to extend beyond the linguistic domain by boosting the development of 
executive functioning skills. Crucially, recent findings suggest that this 
effect can be detected in bilingual infants before their first birthday 
indicating that it emerges as a result of early bilingual exposure and the 
experience of negotiating two linguistic systems in infants' environment. 
However, these conclusions are based on only two research studies from the last 
decade (Comishen, Bialystok, & Adler, 2019; Kovács & Mehler, 2009), so to date, 
there is a lack of evidence regarding their replicability and generalizability. 
In addition, previous research does not shed light on the precise aspects of 
bilingual experience and the extent of bilingual exposure underlying the 
emergence of this early bilingual advantage. The present study addressed these 
two questions by assessing attentional control abilities in 7-month-old 
bilingual infants in comparison to same-age monolinguals and in relation to 
their individual bilingual exposure patterns. Findings did not reveal 
significant differences between monolingual and bilingual infants in the measure 
of attentional control and no relation between individual performance and degree 
of bilingual exposure. Bilinguals showed different patterns of allocating 
attention to the visual rewards in this task compared to monolinguals. Thus, 
this study indicates that bilingualism modulates attentional processes early on, 
possibly as a result of bilinguals' experience of encoding dual-language 
information from a complex linguistic input, but it does not lead to significant 
advantages in attentional control in the first year of life.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.13011
PMID: 32603543


1751. Dev Sci. 2020 Mar;23(2):e12894. doi: 10.1111/desc.12894. Epub 2019 Oct 1.

Positive evidence for neonatal imitation: A general response, adaptive 
engagement.

Nagy E(1), Pilling K(1), Blake V(1), Orvos H(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Dundee, Dundee, UK.
(2)University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.

The study employed four gestural models using frame-by-frame microanalytic 
methods, and followed how the behaviours unfolded over time. Forty-two human 
newborns (0-3 days) were examined for their imitation of tongue protrusion, 
'head tilt with looking up', three-finger and two-finger gestures. The results 
showed that all three gesture groups were imitated. Results of the temporal 
analyses revealed an early and a later, second stage of responses. Later 
responses were characterized by a suppression of similar, but non-matching 
movements. Perinatal imitation is not a phenomenon served by a single underlying 
mechanism; it has at least two different stages. An early phase is followed by 
voluntary matching behaviour by the neonatal infant.

© 2019 The Authors. Developmental Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12894
PMCID: PMC7277498
PMID: 31408564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1752. Dev Sci. 2007 Nov;10(6):778-85. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00636.x.

Young children use their hands to tell their mothers what to say.

Goldin-Meadow S(1), Goodrich W, Sauer E, Iverson J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. 
sgm@uchicago.edu

Children produce their first gestures before their first words, and their first 
gesture+word sentences before their first word+word sentences. These gestural 
accomplishments have been found not only to predate linguistic milestones, but 
also to predict them. Findings of this sort suggest that gesture itself might be 
playing a role in the language-learning process. But what role does it play? 
Children's gestures could elicit from their mothers the kinds of words and 
sentences that the children need to hear in order to take their next linguistic 
step. We examined maternal responses to the gestures and speech that 10 children 
produced during the one-word period. We found that all 10 mothers 'translated' 
their children's gestures into words, providing timely models for how one- and 
two-word ideas can be expressed in English. Gesture thus offers a mechanism by 
which children can point out their thoughts to mothers, who then calibrate their 
speech to those thoughts, and potentially facilitate language-learning.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00636.x
PMID: 17973795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1753. Dev Sci. 2004 Nov;7(5):550-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00379.x.

Maturation of fetal responses to music.

Kisilevsky S(1), Hains SM, Jacquet AY, Granier-Deferre C, Lecanuet JP.

Author information:
(1)Queen's University and Kingston General Hospital, Kingston, Canada. 
kisilevb@post.queensu.ca

Maturation of fetal response to music was characterized over the last trimester 
of pregnancy using a 5-minute piano recording of Brahms' Lullaby, played at an 
average of 95, 100, 105 or 110 dB (A). Within 30 seconds of the onset of the 
music, the youngest fetuses (28-32 weeks GA) showed a heart rate increase 
limited to the two highest dB levels; over gestation, the threshold level 
decreased and a response shift from acceleration to deceleration was observed 
for the lower dB levels, indicating attention to the stimulus. Over 5 minutes of 
music, fetuses older than 33 weeks GA showed a sustained increase in heart rate; 
body movement changes occurred at 35 weeks GA. These findings suggest a change 
in processing of complex sounds at around 33 weeks GA, with responding limited 
to the acoustic properties of the signal in younger fetuses but attention 
playing a role in older fetuses.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00379.x
PMID: 15603288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]